Keir Starmer is a husband, father, and former Chief Prosecutor. His entire career has been about securing justice for those that need it.

From representing people on death row as a human rights lawyer, to working on setting up the Northern Ireland Police Board in the wake of the Good Friday agreement, to making the law work for victims as Chief Prosecutor.

He was elected leader of the Labour Party in 2020 to continue this work. 
Childhood
Keir grew up in a small town called Oxted, in Surrey. His dad worked as a toolmaker in a factory and his mum was a nurse for the NHS.

Like many families, they faced challenges. His mum battled a rare, severe illness for all her life. Keir spent lots of his childhood seeing his mum go into hospital, where his father would always be at her side. 

Despite the challenges this presented for Keir, he was hugely influenced by his mother’s courage and determination to live her life despite her illness. It also gave him a deep gratitude for the NHS.

At school he worked hard to sit the 11-plus and passed, then going to a local grammar school. When he was 18 years old, he got a place at Leeds University to study law, becoming the first in his family to go to university.

Keir was obsessed with football and still plays every Sunday with friends. He describes himself as a “box-to-box midfield general,” although his teammates may have different views. A lifelong Arsenal fan, he has a season ticket at the Emirates, where he attends with his children.
Standing up for working people
Keir got his qualifications as a lawyer in 1987 and began working as a barrister. 

He spent a lot of his time providing free legal advice defending ordinary people against the powerful. He worked on some high-profile cases, taking on fights against the odds with Shell and McDonalds, as well as working with the National Union of Mineworkers to prevent the Tories’ pit closures.

After that, Keir was the legal advisor to the Northern Ireland Policing Board for five years. The board was an important part of bringing communities together following the Good Friday Agreement.

It was during this time when Keir first met his wife, Victoria, who now works for the NHS. 

Keir and Victoria married in 2007. The couple have two children.
In 2008, Keir became Director of Public Prosecutions, putting him at the head of the Crown Prosecution Service and its thousands of employees. During that time there were big cuts to public services, and Keir had to reform the service to make sure it still delivered the justice people rightly expect of the system.

As well as changing the way the CPS worked, he was involved in seeing through some important cases, that had a big impact on society to this day. He helped bring Stephen Lawrence’s murderers to justice, changed the guidance to better support for victims of sexual and domestic violence, and prosecuted MPs for misuse of expenses.

Keir received a knighthood in 2014 for his services to criminal justice. He proudly invited his parents to Buckingham Palace for the event, who in turn brought along the family dog!

Later in life, Keir’s drive to make the world a fairer place saw him enter politics. He was first elected to Parliament in 2015, at the age of 52. He serves as the member for Holborn and St Pancras, where he has lived for many years with his family.

He was Shadow Secretary of State for Exiting the European Union (2016-2020) and Shadow Immigration Minister (2015-2016).

In April 2020, Keir was elected as Leader of the Labour Party.
“It is the honour and privilege of my life. I will do my utmost to guide us through these difficult times, to serve all our communities, and to strive for the good of our country.”
Keir Starmer

Getting Britain’s future back, together
Right now, it feels like Britain isn’t working.

Our public services are on their knees, hard working people are not making ends meet, victims of crime are being let down, and that deep British belief, that the next generation will be better off, is at risk.

Keir Starmer and the Labour Party offer the change our country needs. Not just reassurance that it will be ok, but hope. There is a better future for Britain.

Labour will build a Britain that is forging ahead, not falling behind. One where the economy is secure, and rewards hard work. One where you don’t have to move away to get on. If you want to help us build a better country for working people, join us

Rachel Reeves speech to business leaders at Rolls Royce
May 28, 2024
Good morning.

In five weeks’ time, the British people will go to the polls. 

To make a profound choice about the future of our country.

And where better to think about the future than here at Rolls Royce, in Derby.

Away from the short-termism of politics, the pessimism of our present moment, here you have the very model of a great British business…

… a global brand synonymous with excellence…

… that continues to this day to pioneer in new technologies critical to the challenges of a changing world…

… from submarine technologies crucial to defence, to the development of carbon neutral aviation at the frontier of the climate transition.

And a business partnering with homegrown small and medium enterprises throughout its supply chain…

… which has nurtured deep roots in this city going back more than a century.

A business built on the foundations of a past in which we can take pride, with a vision of a future that we can invest our hope in.

**

As Shadow Chancellor, one of the great privileges of this role has been to travel the country and meet entrepreneurs, innovators and business leaders all across the UK.

In the most challenging of economic times, they give me immense optimism. 

Today I want to put forward a simple proposition:

That this changed Labour Party is today the natural party of British business.

And I want to set out the central economic fault line in this election, the choice before the British people on the fourth of July: 

Five more years of chaos with the Conservative Party, leaving working people worse off;

Or stability with a changed Labour Party.

TORY INSTABILITY

I can tell you exactly what Rishi Sunak wants you to think on polling day.

He’s already saying it. 

That the plan is working – don’t change course now.

That the chaos and instability wrought by Liz Truss was just a blip.

That the deep problems we face are down to global events – they’re not his fault at all. 

�?Don’t judge 14 years on 49 days’, he will say.

**

I want to take that head on.

Because while it is true that the crises we have faced are global in origin, our unique exposure to those crises… 

… the reasons we have been hit harder than many comparable countries…

… by the economic impact of covid and then by inflation and rising energy prices…

… can only be explained by choices made by Conservative governments here at home.

And because while the Prime Minister want this election to be about whether inflation is coming down this month…

… he omits to mention when it started to rise: 

On his watch as Chancellor;

Even before the Conservatives, in their clamour to cut taxes for those at the very top, sent interest rates and mortgage costs spiralling.

He omits to mention when it peaked too… 

… on his watch as Prime Minister.

And he omits to mention the families and businesses dealing with the consequences of Conservative economic mismanagement today.

**

Like the family I met in Redcar:

The dad doing an apprenticeship, the mum working in a supermarket…

… who spend every evening talking about money, because there’s just not enough to pay the bills.

The small business owner in Milton Keynes…

… desperate to expand, but faced with a system of business rates that are stacked against her.

Or just down the road from here, the workers at Alstom, some of whom I met just a few months ago…

… who are facing the uncertainty that results…

… when a government is unwilling to take a long-term, strategic approach, in partnership with business and trade unions… 

… the only responsible approach to economic policy.

The Conservatives are insulting the intelligence of millions of people like these, forced to deal with the consequences of their failure. 

**

But we won’t let them get away with it. 

Because the Conservatives do deserve to be judged on the record of those fourteen years.

The general election, in five weeks’ time, is a chance for the British people to pass judgement on fourteen years of economic chaos and decline under the Conservatives.

Fourteen years that have seen taxes reach a seventy year high.

National debt more than double.

And the typical homeowner re-mortgaging this year paying £240 more every single month, after the disastrous mini-budget.

Wages flat. 

Public services on their knees – taxpayers asked to put more and more in, but getting less and less in return.

And economic growth on the floor.

Five Prime Ministers.

Seven Chancellors.


Twelve plans for growth, each yielding less than the last.

To put this into perspective:

If the UK economy had grown at the average rate of OECD economies under the Tories, it would now be £150 billion larger;

An additional £5,000 for every household;

Providing an additional £55 billion more investment in our public services.  

**

That is their record – and they deserve to be judged on it. 


The Conservatives have failed on the economy.

The plan isn’t working.

And Rishi Sunak’s decision to call an early election is the clearest sign of that. 

If he doesn’t believe his plan is working, why should you?

TAX

And no matter how much they tell us that Liz Truss was nothing to do with them, their every action tells us otherwise. 

They haven’t learnt their lesson.

They’re singing from the same songbook.

With the Prime Minister’s priorities dissolving into thin air, what is his last, desperate throw of the dice?

Not to deliver on the promises he has made over the last two years.

But instead, to offer up £64 billion worth of unfunded tax cuts. 

They offered up another one just last night. 

The Conservative cannot say how they’re going to pay for them.

What cuts will they make to public services?

What other taxes will they raise?

Or will they be paid for by yet more borrowing?

And why should anyone believe them, after – I’ll say it again – the tax burden has reached it’s highest in seventy years?

Be in no doubt, the single biggest risk to Britain’s economy is five more years of the Conservative Party.

CHANGED LABOUR

My ambitions for Britain are so much greater than that.

I don’t think we need fantasy economics to look and hope for a better future – just look around us.

But we do need change.

Under Keir’s leadership, we have changed the Labour Party so that we may have the chance to change our country for the better.

To offer a government that is pro-worker and pro-business, in the knowledge that each depends upon the success of the other.

A party that understands business. 

That works with business.

I’m not one of those politicians who thinks the private sector is a dirty word, or a necessary evil.

I’ve worked in the private sector.

Before politics, I worked in financial services in West Yorkshire.

I know what a successful business can do for places like those.

And I know that economic growth comes from the success of businesses, large, medium and small – there is no other way.

I’m not talking about the old trickle down, free market dogmas of the past…

… but instead, a new spirit of partnership between government and business.

An approach fit for a more uncertain world.  

I know there is no policy that I can announce…

… no plan that can be drawn up in Whitehall…

… that will not be improved from engagement with business.

And our manifesto will bear the imprint of that engagement. 

I want to lead the most pro-growth, pro-business Treasury in our country has ever seen…

… with a laser focus on making working people better off.  

Today, more than 120 senior business leaders have signed a letter, expressing their support for a Labour government.

Across the world of business, Labour is being recognised as the natural partner of business; 

The party of growth and of enterprise. 

**

A few years ago, you might not have expected to hear those things from the Labour Party. 

Think how far we have come under Keir’s leadership, in four short years.

If we can change this party, to bring it back to the service of working people;

If we can return it to the centre ground of politics;

If we can bring business back to Labour;

Then I know we can bring business back to Britain.

To bring investment back to Britain.

To bring growth back to Britain.

To bring hope back to Britain. 

Because by bringing business back to Britain, we can deliver a better future for working people.

Whatever ideologues on left and right say, it’s not either-or: 

This Labour Party understands that business success is crucial to good jobs, and good work is crucial to successful businesses.

It is by bringing business back to Britain that we can create good jobs that pay a decent wage;

Bring in investment to build strong communities with thriving high streets;

Put more money in people’s pockets;

And take pride in goods and services made here in Britain, but exported around the world. 

LABOUR’S PLAN

Our plans for growth are built on partnership with business;

A mission-led government, prepared to take on the big challenges that we face and ready to seize the opportunities of the future.

And a government that will build all its plans for the future on the bedrock of economic stability.

It is clearer than ever that at this election, there is a choice between Tory chaos or Labour stability. And stability is change.

Stability, so that we never again see a repeat of the mini budget and the damage it did to family finances.

Stability, so that families and business can plan for the future.

Stability of direction… 

… so we can bring together government, business and working people in common purpose… 

… to meet the great challenges of our time. 

**

That will be underpinned by robust fiscal rules, that get debt falling by the end of the parliament. 

I will never play fast and loose with the public finances – because when you do so, you put family finances at risk.

We have started as we mean to go on: 

I have been very clear that every policy we announce, and every line in our manifesto, will be fully costed and fully funded. 

No ifs, no ands, no buts. 

That is the attitude I will take into the Treasury.

Because taxpayers’ money should be spent with the same care with which we spend our own money. 

**

I remember how, when I was growing up, my mum used to sit at the kitchen table, combing over, line by line, her bank statements and her receipts. 

We weren’t badly off, but we didn’t have money to spare. 

To my mum, every penny mattered. 

Believe me, I understand – the basic test for whoever is Chancellor is to bring that attitude to the public finances. 

**

And stability will rest – as it always has done when Britain has enjoyed economic success – on strong institutions.

I started my career as an economist at the Bank of England.

I know why the stability it brings and its independence from short term politics matter to economic success and the battle against inflation.

So Labour will not play – I will not play – the Tory game of undermining the Treasury or the Bank of England;

And I will introduce a new fiscal lock;

So that any government making significant and permanent changes to tax and spending… 

… will be subject to a forecast from the independent Office for Budget Responsibility. 

So that there is never a repeat of the mini budget. 

Stability must mean something else too – and I have heard time and time again from business how important this is:

Certainty in our tax system;

Which is why we have committed to the publication of a business tax roadmap… 

… covering the duration of the parliament, within the first six months of a Labour government;

And it is why corporation tax will be capped at its current rate for the duration of the next Parliament.

That is the lowest rate among G7 economies.


And  should our competitiveness be under threat, we will act.

STABILITY

Stability will be the bedrock of everything we do. 

But stability alone is not enough. 

It is one, central part of what I call securonomics;

A new approach, which recognises that our age of insecurity requires new answers to new economic challenges.

So stability must stand alongside a plan to fix our weak levels of investment. 

Britain today is the only G7 country with investment below 20 percent of GDP. 

I am not under the illusion that government can fix this alone – the lifeblood of economic growth is business investment. 

So investment will be delivered through a new partnership between government and business;

Embodied in a modern industrial strategy;

And in a new National Wealth Fund…

… with government investing to crowd in tens of billions of pounds of private investment… 

… to create the jobs of the future, drive down bills, and achieve energy independence.

**

And we will need reform too.

No more ducking the difficult decisions. 

No more shrinking from vested interests. 

No more accepting that this is as good as it gets.

So we will reform our politics…

… pushing power out of Westminster so our local and regional leaders can deliver for their areas.

We will reform our skills system… 

… to give working people the chance to succeed in a changing world of work…

… replacing the Apprenticeship Levy with a new Growth and Skills Levy.

We will reform our planning system…

… taking head on the single biggest obstacle to growth and investment we face, to get Britain building again.

We will deliver reform for security in work, with a New Deal for Working People.

And we will forge a closer relationship with our nearest neighbours in the European Union, to ease the burden of bureaucracy and red tape on British businesses;

Including a new veterinary agreement, an agreement on touring visas, and the mutual recognition of professional qualifications.

**

Stability, investment, reform. 

You’re going to hear those three words a lot from me. 

Because they are the ingredients of a genuine plan for the future.

An alternative to managed decline.

The reason that I can say today, with confidence, that this Labour Party is the natural party of British business.

CHANGE

The choice at the next election is simple:

Five more years of the vicious cycle of chaos and decline which the Conservatives have set in motion;

Or a changed Labour Party;

Putting stability first, in the service of working people.

**

We will fight this election on the economy. 

Every day we will expose the damage the Conservatives have done…

… the further damage they threaten to do.

And we will set out Labour’s alternative. 

Five missions for a decade of national renewal.

And six first steps to point the way to a better Britain.

Cutting NHS waiting times, with 40,000 new appointments every single week;

Launching a new Border Security Command to smash criminal gangs and strengthen our borders;

Setting up Great British Energy, a new, publicly owned clean power company;

Cracking down on antisocial behaviour;

Recruiting 6,500 new teachers;

All fully costed, all fully funded;

All those ambitions built on the bedrock of economic stability.

The foundation stones for a decade of national renewal.

**

To serve as Chancellor of the Exchequer would be the privilege of my life. 

Not to luxuriate in status;

Not as a staging post in a career;

But to serve.

I know the responsibility that will come with that. 

I embrace it. 

I know that it will not be easy.

It will take hard work.

And it will require harder choices.

I am ready for it. 

**

As I travel around the country, I see great potential everywhere I go.

In dynamic, great British businesses like this one.

In labs and classrooms in our world-leading universities.

And in the talent and effort of working people. 

It is time to unlock that potential.

Turn the page on chaos and decline.

And start a new chapter for Britain.

Labour is ready.

Thank you.

Keir Starmer speech: Country First, Party Second
May 27, 2024

Thank you all for coming here on a Bank Holiday Monday.  

At least we’re by the seaside. And we are in Sussex, this is a part of the world I know very well. I have family here – close family. Both my sisters, and my uncle lived for many many years in Worthing.

Now, like everyone, I imagine my character is shaped by where I started in life. I grew up in a small town, not a million miles away from here, a place called Oxted on the Surrey-Kent border. 

Similar to Lancing, minus the sea. And should you go to Oxted, some of you could stop off if you’re travelling back to London, you will see a place that, in my opinion, is about as English as it gets.

A mix of Victorian red bricks and pebble-dashed semis while all around you have rolling pastures and the beautiful chalk hills of the North Downs.

I loved growing up there. You could make easy pocket money clearing stones for the local farmers, that was actually my first job. And you could play football until the cows came home – literally. At my first football club, Boulthurst Athletic, we shared our home pitch with the local cows.

It’s part of why I love our country. Not just the beauty – or the football – also the sort of quiet, uncomplaining resilience. The togetherness of the countryside. That is the best of British.  

And, to be honest – it’s just as well. Because you need it. I mean – anyone who thinks that hardship in Britain is found only in our cities, anyone who thinks there’s no struggle outside of our cities, yes even here in the South East, let me tell you – they know nothing of the countryside.

My own story is a testament to this. Because it wasn’t easy for us.  My dad was a tool-maker. He worked in a factory – my Mum was a nurse. But for most of her life she had a debilitating illness, Still’s disease. To be honest, she would hate that word, ‘debilitating’, because mum never gave up, she never complained. But her illness did shape our lives.

This was the 1970s of course, so there were hard times. I know what out of control inflation feels like, how the rising cost-of-living can make you scared of the postman coming down the path: “will he bring another bill we can’t afford?”

We used to choose the phone bill because when it got cut off, it was always the easiest to do without. We didn’t have mobiles back then but you could still just about get on with it.

Now, all this has stayed with me. It’s shaped the plan I have drawn up for Britain and the importance, above all, of economic stability. The need to never put working people through the whirlwind of chaos, the rising taxes, rising prices, rising mortgage costs – five thousand pounds for every working family – that’s what the Tories have inflicted on Britain. 

The price working people have paid for their chaos, it’s unforgivable.

But as I reflect and look forward to this election I believe my background has also shaped my politics in a deeper way. Look – this England has always felt fairly removed from Westminster. Politics has always been something that happens far away.

And yet something more profound has changed during the last fourteen years of Tory Government. People now feel like more and more of the decisions that affect their community are taken by people who not only live miles away but have little empathy for their challenges.

A politics that is at best doing something to people, not with them. But at its worst, as we saw in horrifying detail in Westminster last week, those twin injustices – the Horizon and Infected Blood scandals, is something much, much darker even than that.

It’s about respect, or to be more precise, the lack of it – that is the canary in the mine of injustice. For a long time now working people have believed opportunity in Britain is stacked against them. But now we are at a dangerous new point close to crossing a rubicon on trust, not just in politics but in so many of the institutions that are meant to serve and protect the British people.    

A moment where people no longer believe their values or interests carry the respect of those in power. And when you put that alongside a Government, that over fourteen years has left living standards in this country worse than when they found them, that has torched any semblance of standards in public life, Westminster parties that broke rules they put in place to save lives – rules they expected you to follow but ignored themselves – then you get a crisis in nothing less than who we are as a nation. 

The values that have held us together, that have driven us on, through the hard times, towards our greatest achievements, taken to the edge by these Tories.

Healing these wounds is what national renewal means. Politics has to be about service. Britain must be a country that respects your contribution. Everyone – not just those at the top – deserves the chance to get on. These are the ideas I’m fighting for. 

This is my project – a Britain once more in the service of working people. Country first, party second.

Now – I don’t know if this is a new politics or whether it’s simply a return to something older that used to be taken for granted.

But public service is the bare minimum you should expect. And you also deserve the security, the certainty, the basic ordinary hope, that Britain will be better for your children. No matter our struggles – we always had that in the 1970s – my parents always believed that, in the end, hard work would be rewarded and Britain would be better for their children. For me.

Now, that might not sound like much to some people but you can’t underestimate how important it is for working class families like mine, how much it comforted my parents.

It gave us a hope and a stability we could build our lives around and I believe it’s what working people want now – more than anything. They want to believe in the future. They want, when they say to their children “work hard and you can achieve anything”, for that to feel true.

But after fourteen years of Tory damage to our values, the service and security they should expect as a given. They just don’t believe it anymore – and that has consequences for all parties.

Look – whatever the polls say, I know there are countless people who haven’t decided how they’ll vote in this election. They’re fed up with the failure, chaos and division of the Tories, but they still have questions about us: has Labour changed enough? Do I trust them with my money, our borders, our security.

My answer is yes you can, because I have changed this party, permanently.

This has been my driving mission since day one. I was determined to change Labour so that it could serve the British people, give them a government that matches the ambition they have for their family and community.

And the very foundation of any good government is economic security, border security, national security. Make no mistake – if the British people give us the opportunity to serve, then this is their core test. It is always their core test. The definition of service. Can you protect this country?

I haven’t worked for four years on this, just to stop now. This is the foundation, the bedrock that our manifesto and our first steps, will be built upon. 

And then on that foundation with an end to the Tory chaos. We can start to rebuild our country.

Step one – economic stability. The very foundation of growth, with tough spending rules that mean we can keep inflation, taxes and mortgages low. I am fed up of listening to the Prime Minister tell you we have turned the corner. That is a form of disrespect in itself.

Taxes – higher than at any time since the war. Chaos – hitting every working family to the tune of £5000, and a Prime Minister prepared to do it all over again. He says he wants to get rid of National Insurance. £46bn – that is currently used on your pension and the NHS and he’s not prepared to say how he will fund it.

That means, at this election – either your pension is under threat, or he’s prepared to blow the economy up all over again. He hasn’t learned a thing. Working people need stability. They want things to improve, they want things to move on, they want change.   

But they expect you to take care of the public finances as well. Because if you lose control of the economy – it’s working people who pay the price. Liz Truss lost control of the economy. I am not prepared to let a Labour Government ever do that to working people.

That’s why stability is our first step – a non-negotiable pact with working people – the symbol of a changed Labour Party – ready to serve our country.

Step two – we will cut NHS waiting times. 40,000 extra appointments every week paid for by cracking down on tax avoidance and non-doms.

Step three – we will launch a new Border Security Command with new specialist investigators, new resources, and new powers – including counter-terrorism powers. These vile criminals are making a fortune putting vulnerable people in boats made to order, sending them across the busiest shipping lane in the world. Nobody but nobody should be making that journey.

When I was Director of Public Prosecutions – I worked on operations that smashed terrorist gangs across Europe. I will never accept we can’t do the same for these vile gangs. Labour will secure Britain’s borders.

Step Four – we will set up Great British Energy, paid for by a windfall tax on the energy giants who made record profits while your bills went through the roof. A new company – owned by the taxpayer, making money for the taxpayer, harnessing the opportunity of clean British power, making us energy independent, removing Putin’s boot from our throat and cutting bills in your home – for good.

Step five – we’ll crackdown on anti-social behaviour. I don’t want to hear another person tell me this is low-level crime – I’ve been hearing that all my life. It blights communities big and small, it always has. I know Worthing well, as I say – my Uncle lived here. And three years ago – I walked around with the police here, talked to some of the people on the high street and they told me in no uncertain terms the impact anti-social behaviour was having on them. 

So we will get more police on the streets in your town. 13,000 new officers and community support officers paid for by cutting down on wasteful contracts.

And step six – we’ll also get 6,500 new teachers in the classroom paid for by removing tax breaks on private schools, a down payment on an education system that we will reform. More creativity, more confidence, more resilience, for all children.

I was the first person in my family to go to university. I know the power of education. Every child should grow up believing that success belongs to them, that they don’t have to change who they are just to get on, that is the Britain we will fight for. 

Labour will deliver opportunity for our children.

Now – I am proud of these first steps. They are a new path for our country, a plan that will turn the page, deliver stability and change. And because we have been so ruthless in making sure these policies are deliverable, fully-funded, ready to go.  

We also provide the certainty that working people, businesses and communities need. A clear direction. Not the endless spinning around that successive Conservative governments have subjected our country to. The Prime Minister with a new plan every week, a new strategy every month, and at this rate – a new election campaign every day!

I’m not joking. All this spinning round and round, it’s symbolic of the chaos and the instability. You’ve seen that again over the past few days. The desperation of this national service policy – a teenage dad’s army – paid for by cancelling levelling-up funding and money from tax avoidance that we would use to invest in our NHS.

All elections are a choice and this is a clear one: levelling up and the NHS with Labour. Or more desperate chaos with the Tories. That is the choice.  

But in a way this desperation tells another story and underlines how elections are about more than individual changes or policies, but about values, temperament, character and a bigger question: whose side are you on? Who do you hold in your mind’s eye when you are making decisions?

Everything I have fought for has been shaped by my life, every change I have made to this party has been about this cause, the answer to that question, the only answer, the working people of this country delivering on their aspirations, earning their respect, serving their interests.

I know those people are looking at this election, looking at me personally. So I make this promise: I will fight for you.

I took this Labour Party four and a half years ago and I changed it into the party you see today. I was criticised for some of the changes I’ve made – change is always like that, there are always people who say don’t do that, don’t go so fast – but whenever I face a fork in the road, at the Crown Prosecution Service, in my work in Northern Ireland, and especially here in the Labour Party… it always comes back to this, the golden thread: country first, Party second.

Because you cannot restore trust and respect with the politics of protest. You cannot move our country forward with gimmicks and gestures. And you cannot truly serve the country if you only do what is convenient, that is why I changed the Labour Party. That is how we serve the British people.

I see no fight in the Prime Minister. No appetite to do the same for his party. They will not change. Seriously – whenever he is confronted by factions in his party, people who are miles away from serving the values of the British people, he caves in – every time. A ‘party-first’ weakness at the heart of his leadership.

Rwanda is the perfect example. He knows it won’t work, he said that. He tried to stop it when he was Chancellor but he was too weak to stand up to his party. He caved in and now he’s gone through with it anyway it’s cost you six hundred million pounds and he’s called an election before it can be tested. Weakness upon weakness.

How do you think working people feel when the Prime Minister says we’ve turned a corner? How do you think they feel when they see the people who did that to their mortgages, swanning around in the House of Lords because he was too weak to stand up to them.

Service isn’t just a word, it requires action. You have to roll up your sleeves and change things for the better. I have changed this Labour party, dragged it back to service, and I will do exactly the same for Westminster – that is the choice at this election: Service or self-interest, stability or chaos, a Labour Party that has changed or a Tory Party that has run away from the mainstream. 

The choice is yours. You can stop the chaos, you can turn the page, you can join with us, and together we can rebuild our country.

Thank you.

Keir Starmer delivering a speech on the announcement of the UK General Election
May 22, 2024
Tonight the Prime Minister has finally announced the next General Election.

A moment the country needs – and has been waiting for. And where, by the force of our democracy power returns to you. 

A chance to change for the better. Your future. Your community. Your country.

It will feel like a long campaign – I’m sure of that. But no matter what else is said and done. That opportunity for change is what this election is about. 

Over the course of the last four years – we have changed the Labour Party. Returned it once more to the service of working people. 

All we ask now – humbly – is to do exactly the same for our country. And return Britain to the service of working people. To that purpose.

We offer three reasons why you should change Britain with Labour.

One – because we will stop the chaos. 

Look around our country. The sewage in our rivers. People waiting on trolleys in A&E. Crime virtually unpunished. Mortgages and food prices – through the roof.

It’s all – every bit of it – a direct result of the Tory chaos in Westminster. 

Time and again, they pursue their own interests. Rather than tackling the issues that affect your family. 

And if they get another five years, they will feel entitled to carry on exactly as they are. Nothing will change. 

A vote for Labour is a vote for stability – economic and political. A politics that treads more lightly on all our lives. A vote to stop the chaos. 

Two – because it’s time for change. 

Our offer is to reset both our economy and our politics.

So that they once again serve the interests of working people. 

We totally reject the Tory view that economic strength is somehow gifted from those at the top. 

Over the past fourteen years – through all the crises we have had to face – sticking with this idea has left our country exposed, insecure and unable to unlock the potential of every community. 

But a vote for Labour is a vote to turn the page on all that. A vote for change. 

And finally, three – because we have a long-term plan to rebuild Britain. A plan that is ready to go. Fully-costed and fully funded. 

We can deliver economic stability. Cut the NHS waiting times. Secure our borders with a New Border Security Command.

Harness Great British Energy to cut your bills for good. Tackle anti-social behaviour.

And get the teachers we need in your children’s classroom. 

But most of importantly of all, we do all this with a new spirit of service. 

Country first, party second. 

A rejection of the gesture politics you will see in this campaign, I have no doubt from the Tories and from the SNP.  

I am well aware of the cynicism people hold towards politicians at the moment.

But I came into politics late, having served our country as leader of the Crown Prosecution Service.

And I helped the Police Service in Northern Ireland to gain the consent of all communities.

Service of our country is the reason – and the only reason – why I am standing here now – asking for your vote. 

And I believe with patience, determination and that commitment to service there is so much pride and potential we can unlock across our country.  

So – here it is – the future of the country – in your hands. 

On 4th July you have the choice. And together, we can stop the chaos.

We can turn the page. We can start to rebuild Britain. And change our country. 

Thank you.

Why the Conservative Party’s manifesto will mean £4,800 more on your mortgage
Jun 13, 2024
TORY MANIFESTO: THE MONEY'S
NOT THERE
5 MORE YEARS OF TORY CHAOS

The Conservative manifesto is a desperate wish list of £71 billion worth of unfunded promises that will lead to five more years of chaos and £4,800 more on family mortgages.

The last time the Conservatives played fast and loose with the country’s finances, they crashed the economy and the British people are still paying the price. Rishi Sunak presented himself as the antidote to the chaos of Liz Truss, but he has instead become a tribute act, making the same mistakes, with the same likely results. 

The Tories have made £71 billion worth of unfunded promises. However, the money is not there. The Conservatives’ plan will lead to higher borrowing, rising interest rates and £4,800 more on mortgages.

The money’s not there: The Tories’ £71 billion black hole
The Conservatives have made five significant mistakes in their costings:

They claim to have identified £12 billion in savings from the benefits bill, but the vast majority of their proposed changes are already banked in the public finances, and every leading expert disputes the Tories’ ability to deliver savings.
They claim they can fund their pledges through a £6 billion cut in tax avoidance, but their figures omit the £1 billion investment needed to achieve these savings. 
Rishi Sunak’s National Service gimmick costs at least double what they have assumed, because they appear not to have taken full account of the costs for accommodation, training and equipment for 30,000 new recruits every single year. Their figures for compulsory community activities have similar holes, especially given the likely training costs involved in the categories they highlight: special constable, NHS support staff and RNLI volunteers. This means they have spent all of their tax avoidance revenue on this policy alone, before all the others they claim it funds.
The Tories are relying on fantasy savings from universities. They cannot raise £1 billion from scrapping poor performing university courses, because they have not set out plans to cap student places. 
And their non-existent proposal to save money from government agencies comes with no detail whatsoever, a further £1 billion hole in their plans. 

How Tory borrowing will increase your mortgage
With a black hole in their costings, the Tories’ £71 billion worth of unfunded promises would mean an increase in government borrowing. More government borrowing would cause an increase in interest rates. And higher interest rates would cause mortgage rates to rise too.

Labour will not raise taxes on working people
Jun 10, 2024

Labour will not increase income tax, national insurance or VAT. Unlike the Tories, we have been clear about how we will pay for our first steps in government: by making the tax system fairer.

Ending tax breaks for private schools, which exempt them from VAT and business rates.
Closing the loopholes which allow some ‘non-dom’ mega rich people who live in the UK to avoid paying tax.
Introducing a proper windfall tax on the huge profits the energy giants are making.
We will deliver economic stability with tough spending rules, so we can grow our economy and keep taxes, inflation and mortgages as low as possible.
The Tories have hiked taxes
Under Rishi Sunak, the tax burden in the UK is at its highest level in 70 years. Households will be on average £870 worse off under the Tories.

Despite this, public services like the NHS are on their knees.

After 14 years in power, the Conservative Government has failed on the economy, failed on public services and failed on living standards.
Why has tax in the UK risen?
With Liz Truss as Prime Minister, the Conservatives crashed the British economy – and they are now making the British public pay to clean up the mess. 

And while the Tories have piled tax rises on the shoulders of working people and businesses, they are keeping unfair loopholes open, and letting government waste and fraud spiral. 

Now Rishi Sunak is planning on repeating the mistakes of the disastrous Liz Truss mini-budget, with £71 billion worth of unfunded spending pledges.
How Labour will bring stability back to the economy
Labour will ensure that no future government can inflict the devastation on working families that Liz Truss and the Conservatives did.

We will introduce a new fiscal lock, guaranteeing in law that any government making significant tax and spending changes will be subject to an independent forecast from the Office for Budget Responsibility.

Labour will tax fairly and levy a proper windfall tax on the huge profits the energy giants are making, and end the tax loophole which exempts private schools from VAT and business rates.
How Labour will give business the confidence to invest
To bring stability, an incoming Labour government will publish a roadmap for business taxation, setting out our plans on business tax over the duration of the parliament. 

If we expect business to invest in Britain, then tax rates cannot shoot up and down like a yo-yo.

For the period of the next parliament, Labour will also cap the headline rate of corporation tax at its current rate of 25 per cent, the lowest in the G7. 
How Labour will clamp down on tax avoidance
Labour will target raising an extra £5 billion a year by closing the loopholes in Rishi Sunak’s ‘non-dom’ plan and cracking down on tax dodgers.

The gap between the amount of tax owed and what the government collects rose to a staggering £36 billion in 2021/22 – an increase of £5 billion from the year before.

The head of the National Audit Office has said that there is £6 billion a year that could be recovered through a concerted effort on tax avoidance. The Tories are only promising to recover £1 billion a year in outstanding tax debt.

Labour will invest £855 million of additional funding will go to HMRC each year to boost tax income. The plan would raise a net £5 billion a year by the end of the parliament.

Labour’s Child Health Action Plan will create the healthiest generation of children ever
Jun 10, 2024

There is no more important indicator of the state of a country than the wellbeing of its children.

The future is our children and today they are suffering.

More face mental health issues with treatment too slow, more are going to hospital because of tooth decay, and more are growing up obese through no fault of their own.

The cause is clear. The nation’s children are the biggest casualty of the short term ‘sticking plaster’ politics of the last 14 years.

When the Government is deeply divided, on its fifth Prime Minister in seven years, and sees getting to the end of the week without catastrophe as a major success, then long term planning goes out the window. That is happening now – and children are suffering.

“We want the next generation to be chasing their dreams, not a dentist appointment. They should be aspiring to reach their potential, not reach a doctor.“
Keir Starmer MP


That’s why it’s time for a change. We need to restore our sense of what’s possible. That the future for our children can be the better, more prosperous and healthier. We need a bold new ambition: for this to be the healthiest generation of children ever.

A core mission of the next Labour government is to get the NHS back on its feet after 14 years of neglect under the Tories. By doing that, the health service will be able reverse the plummeting health outcomes our children suffer from.

Labour’s Child Health Action Plan:

1. Cut waiting lists for children
Labour will cut waiting times for planned paediatric services by getting the NHS working round the clock delivering 40,000 planned care appointments.

How will Labour pay for this?

By clamping down on tax dodgers and closing non-dom loopholes.

2. Provide mental health support for children in school
Introduce specialist mental health support for children and young people in every school.

How will Labour pay for this?

By abolishing tax breaks for private schools.

3. Boost preventative mental health services
Roll out Young Futures hubs in every community to provide children with preventative mental health support.
Recruit 8,500 specially trained staff across CAMHS and NHS talk therapies.
How will Labour pay for this?

By abolishing tax loopholes for private equity providers and tax breaks for private schools.

4. Transform NHS dentistry

Labour will eliminate dental deserts and improve children’s oral healthy by: 

Delivering 700,000 extra urgent dental appointments per year, so more children can see a dentist when they really need to. 
Introducing a targeted national supervised toothbrushing programme for 3-5-year-olds in our fully funded breakfast clubs.

5. Crackdown on smoking and vaping
Labour will stop children and young people being exposed to the harmful effects of tobacco and vaping by: 

Legislating for a progressive ban on smoking, so the next generation are not addicted.
Making all hospital trusts integrate ‘opt-out’ smoking cessation interventions into routine care, with a named lead on smoking cessation, so parents have all the support they need to quit. 
Clamping down on underage vaping by banning vapes from being branded and advertised to appeal to children. 


6. Ban junk food advertising to children
Labour will tackle childhood obesity by: 

Implementing the 9pm watershed for junk food advertising on television and ban paid-for advertising of less healthy foods on online media aimed at children. 
Getting kids moving, by implementing a mandatory national curriculum that is balanced and broad, and makes a wide range of physical activities compulsory for all schools.

7. Introduce breakfast clubs for all primary school children
A free breakfast club in every primary school so every child is able to start the day with a healthy breakfast and parents are able to get to work.

How will Labour pay for this?

By clamping down on tax dodgers and closing non-dom loopholes.

8. Protect children from the growth of infectious diseases
Deliver on the NHS workforce plan, training more health visitors so parents and babies get the best possible support.

Reforming the service to allow health visitors to administer routine immunisations to vulnerable and at-risk children, ensuring more are protected from infectious diseases.

9. Ban the sale of dangerous highly caffeinated energy drinks to under-16s
Dangerously high caffeinated energy drinks containing over 150mg of caffeine per litre will be banned from sale in retail outlets and online to under 16s, as it has become clear to health and education experts that the current caffeine labelling system is failing to prevent young children from purchasing these drinks. 

The ban will be in line with current labelling and enforced through trading standards.

10. Stop the targeting of school children by fast food outlets
By empowering councils to block the development of new fast food shops outside schools

Labour’s new approach to deliver the Child Health Action Plan

A neighbourhood NHS
Labour will shift care out of the hospital and into the community.

This means:

Allowing for different routes to access referrals (subject to advice from NICE), saving GPs time by allowing professionals like opticians to refer children who need more serious healthcare interventions.
Training more health visitors so parents don’t always end up having to seek help from the GP or A&E because they can’t get the advice they need about their baby’s health.
Bringing back the family doctor by cutting red tape so GPs can spend their time seeing patients rather than on admin, and introducing an incentive to provide continuity of care.
Joining up health and care service by trialling community health centres in each area, bringing together professionals like GPs, district nurses, physiotherapists, dentists, and pharmacists under one roof.
A digital NHS
Labour will shift from an analogue system to a digital one .

This means:

Making the NHS app a one-stop shop for health information and making sure every parent has the information and skills they need to give their child the best start in life.
Digitising the Red Book (Children’s Health Record) to make it easier to access health records for parents and children, informing the best choices.
Improving coordination between education, the health service, social care and the wider services that support families by piloting the expansion of a children’s number, ensuring that no child falls through the gaps.
Introducing a new Fit for the Future fund, paid for by by clamping down on tax dodgers and closing non-dom loopholes so we can double the number of high tech, artificial intelligence enabled scanners in the NHS, to aid early diagnostics and bring down the waiting list.
A prevention-first NHS
Labour will shift the focus of the health system towards prevention with a goal to improve healthy life expectancy for all and halve the gap in healthy life expectancy between different regions of England within ten years.

The next Labour government will shift the focus of government departments, the NHS, and wider public services to prevention by embedding long-term planning.

This means:

Catching problems early, with healthcare in communities so people don’t allow problems to fester, and stat-of-the-art diagnostic equipment to get results as soon as possible.
Creating a national framework that ensures focus and innovation across government, business, public services, and civil society is targeted towards delivering this long-term goal.
Establishing a mission delivery board at the heart of Government to tackle poor health bringing together all departments with an influence over the social determinants of health.
This action plan represents an important stepping stone on the way to the Labour Manifesto which will be issued close to the election date. It represents a fresh approach and a renewed sense of purpose for health.

Labour Party pensions policy: We will keep the pension triple lock and give pensioners security in retirement
Jun 9, 2024

Labour will protect the triple lock on pensions and increase the state pension each year in line with inflation, average earnings, or by 2.5 per cent, whichever is higher.

We will support pensioners and give them the dignity and security they deserve in retirement. All our plans are fully funded, and we will introduce tough spending roles to keep mortgages, inflation and taxes as low as possible. Delivering economic stability is our first step for change.

We will cut energy bills for good with Great British Energy, a publicly owned energy company, and insulate millions of cold, draughty homes. We will cut NHS waiting lists, with 40,000 appointments each week, paid for by cracking down on tax avoidance and non-doms.

How the Tories have hit pensioners with a tax bombshell
Rishi Sunak has failed pensioners.

Over the last 14 years, pensioners have paid a heavy price for Tory failure. A crashed economy, plummeting living standards, health and social care on its knees, rising crime and the highest tax burden in 70 years. 

Record numbers are now paying income tax, with stealth tax rises announced by Sunak set to hammer eight million pensioners with an average rise of £1,000.

Even with their latest unfunded pledge, the Tories are still taking £3 from pensioners and expect them to be thankful for getting £1 back.

There are 300,000 more pensioners living in poverty under the Tories. The last Labour Government lifted over a million pensioners out of poverty.

The Tories’ £71 billion worth of unfunded spending commitments also threatens the future of the State Pension. They have refused to answer how the State Pension will be funded if they achieve their ambition of abolishing National Insurance Contributions.

If the cost of the Tories’ black hole was fully met by raising Income Tax, an average pensioner could be paying hundreds of pounds more in tax.

The economic failure of Rishi Sunak is leaving pensioners across the country worse off.
How Labour will support pensioners
Labour will turn the page on Tory chaos with economic security and political stability.

A Labour government will protect the triple lock on pensions and review the current state of the pensions and retirement savings landscape, to check if the current framework can deliver sustainable retirement incomes for people. 

We will also give the Pensions Regulator new powers to intervene where schemes fail to offer sufficient value for their members. 

Liz Kendall, Labour’s Shadow Pensions Secretary has said: “Retirement should be a time we all look forward to, but more pensioners than ever are renting into retirement, their children are returning home because they’re locked out of the housing market and soaring childcare costs mean pensioners are taking on more responsibilities they weren’t expecting.

“My message to pensioners at this general election is simple – look at your wallet, look at the quality of your healthcare and look at the lack of housing for your children and grandchildren and ask yourself, is this as good as it gets?”

Labour’s plan for childcare and early education
Jun 9, 2024The Tories have broken childcare, so Labour will fix it.  Labour has a clear plan for childcare and early education, giving every child life chances and every parent work choices. 

Because after 14 years, all our children deserve better than a promise the Chancellor made, which even he won’t guarantee – a Tory pledge without a plan that risks crashing the childcare system, like Liz Truss crashed the economy. That’s why Labour will ensure the hours that parents have been promised are delivered. 

Labour’s plan has been built by learning from how childcare works the world over, from Ireland to Australia. It stretches from the end of parental leave to the end of primary school, because every parent knows that childcare costs don’t end when children start school.

Labour is determined to deliver not just more childcare, but better childcare and early education – for the best start to every life.

With Labour: 

Childcare will be available and accessible
Over three thousand new nursery classes across England to open up access to childcare hours for families. Spare school classrooms will be converted into high quality spaces for nurseries, paid for by ending the tax breaks private schools enjoy. 
Labour Lords have already ended the outdated restrictions preventing councils offering childcare themselves.
Childcare will support our children to achieve and thrive
Labour will deliver half a million more children hitting the Early Learning Goals by 2030.
Labour will bring a new focus on supporting language skills and maths learning right from the start.
Labour will support staff working in childcare & early education so they are recognised for the skilled and important work they are doing.
Labour has commissioned Sir David Bell, former chief inspector of Ofsted, to look at how we can drive up standards in childcare in England.
Childcare will be affordable
Labour will deliver the enhanced entitlements the government have offered, saving thousands of pounds a year for working families.
Labour will support three quarters of a million more parents to re-enter the labour market. 
Childcare won’t end when children start school
Labour will provide free breakfast clubs in every primary school in England, paid for by ending tax loopholes and clamping down on tax evasion.
Breakfast clubs drive up attendance and standards and improve behaviour and attainment, because it’s about the club not just the breakfast.
We’ll give parents choices for an earlier start to the working day – helping families to get on not just get by.

Labour Party prisons policy: How we will fix the prisons crisis and keep criminals behind bars
Jun 9, 2024

Labour will fix the prisons crisis by driving through a prisons building programme, as part of our mission to take back our streets and tackle crime and antisocial behaviour.

Overcrowding has made our prisons a powder keg waiting to explode and led to the government instructing the police to arrest fewer criminals and deliberately delay court hearings to stem the flow into prisons.

No wonder millions do not feel safe on the streets and many people are frightened to leave their homes.

The Tories have failed our prisons
The Tories promised to create 20,000 additional prison places, but 10 Justice Secretaries in 10 chaotic years have failed to deliver, with just 6,000 places being built, and the programme delayed.

This failure has left jails bursting at the seams, with criminals – including domestic abusers, one of which who was described as “a risk to children” – now being released up to 70 days early, creating a potential risk to the public.

Prison staff are also increasingly at risk. The number of assaults on staff have risen from 3,266 to 9,204 in 10 years, an increase of 182%. That is 177 assaults on staff per week.  

Rishi Sunak has turned prisons into breeding grounds for crime which are creating ever more hardened criminals. Some 80% of those entering prison for the first time today have a previous offence or caution, at a cost of an astonishing £18bn to the taxpayer. 

How Labour will fix prisons
As part of plans to make Britain’s streets safer, a Labour government will:  

Take control of the planning process by classifying prisons as being of ‘national importance’ on public safety grounds, so the approval decision is in ministers’ hands.
Deliver the 20,000 promised jail places to ensure there is always enough space to lock up the most dangerous offenders
Bring together prison governors and local employers to create Employment Councils to drive down reoffending, linking offenders to training and jobs, and reducing the burden on capacity in the long term.
How Labour will tackle crime and antisocial behaviour
Labour has an ambitious plan to take back our streets that the Tories have abandoned.

Putting 13,000 more neighbourhood police and PCSOs on the beat, funded by a new police efficiency programme on procurement and shared services based on the work of the Police Foundation.
Cracking down on anti-social behaviour through tough new Respect Orders with criminal sanctions for persistent anti-social behaviour.
Giving teenagers the best start in life with new youth hubs, containing mental health staff and youth workers to tackle the crisis in mental health, give teenagers the support they need and prevent knife crime.
Tackling shoplifting gangs by ending the rule brought in by the Tories which stops shop thefts under £200 being investigated.

Take back our streets
Labour believes that security is the bedrock on which opportunities are built, communities can thrive, and local economies can prosper. Security means knowing someone will be there for you if things go wrong, and that laws will be respected and enforced.

But that sense of security has slowly eroded over the past 14 years, with rising levels of violent crime, a knife crime epidemic devastating young lives, and shamefully and persistently high rates of violence against women and girls.

Anti-social behaviour is a blight on society, with drug misuse, fly-tipping and off-road biking increasing in our communities, alongside an epidemic in shoplifting in our town centres. Too often this is dismissed as low-level crime, but it matters hugely to people and hits the very heart of our communities.

At the same time, confidence that there will be any consequences when a crime is committed has collapsed. Too often people fear that when things go wrong, no one will come and nothing will be done. That is the Tories’ abysmal record on crime and justice – criminals laughing at the law and victims paying the price.

Labour will rebuild security on Britain’s streets – with a mission to halve serious violence and rebuild confidence in policing and the criminal justice system.

Labour’s first step towards our mission take back our streets

As a first step for change on our streets, Labour will crack down on antisocial behaviour, with more neighbourhood police paid for by ending wasteful contracts, tough new penalties for offenders, and a new network of youth hubs.

Labour’s pledge to put 13,000 extra neighbourhood police and PCSOs on the beat will give every community a named officer they can get in touch with, so policing gets back to doing what it’s supposed to do.  

Labour's first steps for change
1. Deliver economic stability
2. Cut NHS waiting times
3. Launch a new Border Security Command
4. Set up Great British Energy
5. Crack down on antisocial behaviour
6. Recruit 6,500 new teachers

Manifesto
My plan for change
This election is about change.

A chance to stop the endless Conservative chaos that has directly harmed the finances of every family in Britain.

A moment where we can turn the page on a set of ideas that, over 14 years, have consistently left us more vulnerable in an increasingly volatile world.

And an opportunity to begin the work of national renewal. A rebuilding of our country, so that it once again serves the interests of working people.

Restore hope

Every great nation is held together by shared beliefs. To outsiders they may not seem exceptional or distinctive, but they are essential for a sense of collective national purpose. Britain is no different, but at this moment two of our most important beliefs are in grave danger.

First, that politics should be driven by a sense of service to the country, not considerations of party or self-interest.

Second, that if you work hard then – whoever you are, wherever you started in life – Britain is a country that will respect your contribution and give you a fair chance to get on.

When I consider these beliefs, it is hard not to think back to my childhood. Then, as now, Britain’s place in the world was uncertain. Then, as now, our economy was gripped by stuttering growth and a cost-of-living crisis that hurt working people.

Yet back then, there was at least a degree of security in being able to take those two fundamental beliefs for granted. For families like mine, this was a comfort. The knowledge that Britain would offer your children a better future gave us hope. A hope that may not sound high-minded or particularly idealistic, but which families like mine could build a life around.

Stop the chaos

To restore this hope, we must first end the Conservative chaos. The visible decline in our communities – families weighed down by soaring mortgages; people waiting on trolleys in A&E; sewage in our rivers – is not an accident. Rather, it is a direct result of a governing party that, time and again, puts its own interests and obsessions above the issues that affect families.

The result is a vicious cycle – decline feeding off chaos, chaos feeding off decline – that will continue if they return for five more years. Only a Labour government can break this cycle and stop the chaos.
Turn the page

We must turn the page decisively on the Conservative ideas that have caused the chaos.

The world has become increasingly volatile, with a major war in Europe for the first time in a generation and ever greater threats to the living standards of working people. This ‘age of insecurity’ requires the government to step up, not stand aside.

This means a return to the foundations of good government: national security, secure borders, and economic stability. But it also requires an enduring partnership with business to deliver the economic growth we need. It needs more focus on long- term strategy, not the short-term distractions that can animate Westminster. And it demands a final and total rejection of the toxic idea that economic growth is gifted from the few to the many.

Because whether it is crashing the pound to give tax cuts to the richest 1%; degrading public services because of a mess made by the banks; or the failure to invest in clean British energy that left us exposed when Putin invaded Ukraine – so much of what Britain has been through in the past 14 years is explained by a Conservative failure to face the future. Only Labour can turn the page.

Rebuild our country

We must rebuild our country. It will not be easy. Not only because there is no quick fix to the mess the Conservatives have made. But also, because their failures have sapped our collective confidence that Britain can still achieve great things. I reject this with every fibre of my being. Despite all the chaos inflicted on Britain, the country I see is one where working people never let each other down. They came together in the pandemic – missed weddings, funerals and last goodbyes – to save the lives of people they will never meet. They dug deep in the years of austerity, to keep delivering the public services people needed. And throughout the cost-of-living crisis, they found a way to support those less fortunate than themselves.

We are still a great nation. We can still achieve great things. What we lack is a government that can match the ambition working people have for their family and community, with a credible long-term plan.

This manifesto is that plan. Fully costed, fully funded – built on a rock of fiscal responsibility.

At its heart are five national missions – with clear first steps to begin the journey of rebuilding – that provide a clear destination for everyone invested in Britain’s future. A new Britain, where wealth is created in every community. Where the golden opportunity of clean British power is harnessed for lower bills. Where your town centre has been revitalised and everyone feels safe to walk the streets. Where you can go to work and know you will be treated with dignity and respect. Where our children are equipped with the skills to thrive in the future. Where our NHS is once again at the cutting edge of healthcare. And where we show that politics can be about serving the country.

It’s time for change

I know some people will roll their eyes at this last sentence. Yet serving our country is the only reason I came into politics. The defining purpose of my Labour leadership has been to drag my party away from the dead end of gesture politics and return it once more to the service of working people. I have changed my party. Now I want the chance to bring that change to the country.

But to succeed we need everyone, every community, to play their part. I know, after everything you have been through in the past 14 years, that this is a hard request to make. But I also expect, deep down, that you know this is what our country needs now – an end to the chaos, a turning of the page, and a patient but determined rebuilding of our country.

So, I invite you to join us in this common endeavour of national renewal. It is time to change Britain.

Keir Starmer

Leader of the Labour Party

Help deliver change to Britain.

Labour’s first steps for change


1. Deliver economic stability
2. Cut NHS waiting times
3. Launch a new Border Security Command
4. Set up Great British Energy
5. Crack down on antisocial behaviour
6. Recruit 6,500 new teachers


Labour’s first steps will:

1. Deliver economic stability with tough spending rules, so we can grow our economy and keep taxes, inflation and mortgages as low as possible.
2. Cut NHS waiting times with 40,000 more appointments each week, during evenings and weekends, paid for by cracking down on tax avoidance and non-dom loopholes.
3. Launch a new Border Security Command with hundreds of new specialist investigators and use counter-terror powers to smash criminal boat gangs.
4. Set up Great British Energy, a publicly-owned clean power company, to cut bills for good and boost energy security, paid for by a windfall tax on oil and gas giants.
5. Crack down on antisocial behaviour, with more neighbourhood police paid for by ending wasteful contracts, tough new penalties for offenders, and a new network of youth hubs.
6. Recruit 6,500 new teachers in key subjects to set children up for life, work and the future, paid for by ending tax breaks for private schools.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Mission-driven government

Ending the Conservative chaos is vital, but turning the page with a new government is not in itself enough to tackle the deep-rooted challenges our country now faces. To rebuild Britain, we need to change how Britain is governed.

For too long, Britain has been held back by governments that, because they lack a relentless focus on long-term ends, are buffeted about by events. Politics has enormous potential to change lives for the better, but too often different parts of the government have pursued their own narrow goals rather than working together. Government is at its best when working in partnership with business, trade unions, civil society, faith groups, and communities. But without a shared project those partnerships barely get off the ground.

So, as well as a new administration with new priorities, Britain needs a new approach: mission-driven government.

Mission-driven government means raising our sights as a nation and focusing on ambitious, measurable, long-term objectives that provide a driving sense of purpose for the country. It means a new way of doing government that is more joined up, pushes power out to communities and harnesses new technology, all with one aim in mind – to put the country back in the service of working people.

Labour’s five missions to rebuild Britain

1) Kickstart economic growth
to secure the highest sustained growth in the G7 – with good jobs and productivity growth in every part of the country making everyone, not just a few, better off.

2) Make Britain a clean energy superpower
to cut bills, create jobs and deliver security with cheaper, zero-carbon electricity by 2030, accelerating to net zero.

3) Take back our streets
by halving serious violent crime and raising confidence in the police and criminal justice system to its highest levels.

4) Break down barriers to opportunity
by reforming our childcare and education systems, to make sure there is no class ceiling on the ambitions of young people in Britain.

5) Build an NHS fit for the future
that is there when people need it; with fewer lives lost to the biggest killers; in a fairer Britain, where everyone lives well for longer.

Delivering the change Britain needs will require perseverance. The starting point for delivering these missions is to ensure the foundations of good government are right. Labour will make sure we have strong national security, secure borders, and economic stability. Building on these secure foundations, we have already set out the first steps for change. Today we present further policies in this manifesto, as part of the journey of rebuilding our country.


Help deliver change to Britain.

Strong foundations

National security

No policy commitment in pursuit of Labour’s missions matters unless we uphold the first duty of any government: to keep the country safe. Peace and security are hard earned. They require constant vigilance. Over the last 14 years geopolitical tensions have risen, while the Conservatives have hollowed out our armed forces. Now Putin is attempting to break European security with his full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Labour will meet this challenge by strengthening our armed forces and protecting our national security.

Our commitment to the UK’s nuclear deterrent is absolute. It is a vital safeguard for the UK and our NATO allies. As the party that founded NATO, we maintain our unshakeable commitment to the alliance, and we will apply a NATO test to major defence programmes to ensure we meet our obligations in full.

In recent years, threats to our safety and security have multiplied and diversified. Alongside greater conventional threats, we are faced with the growing emergence of hybrid warfare, including cyber-attacks and misinformation campaigns which seek to subvert our democracy. To ensure the UK is fully prepared to deal with these interconnected threats, Labour will conduct a Strategic Defence Review within our first year in government, and we will set out the path to spending 2.5 per cent of GDP on defence.

From the Skripal poisonings to assassination plots by the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, threats from hostile states or state-sponsored groups are on the rise, but Britain lacks a comprehensive framework to protect us. Labour will take the approach used for dealing with non-state terrorism and adapt it to deal with state-based domestic security threats.

Terrorism remains a significant threat. Labour will bring in ‘Martyn’s Law’ to strengthen the security of public events and venues. We will update the rules around counter-extremism, including online, to stop people being radicalised and drawn towards hateful ideologies. Labour will also ensure the police and intelligence services have the powers and resources they need to protect the British people from terrorism and hostile espionage.

Secure borders

Britain is a tolerant and compassionate country. We have a proud tradition of welcoming people fleeing persecution and abuse. Schemes like Homes for Ukraine, Hong Kong humanitarian visas, and the Syrian resettlement programme have provided important routes for refugees seeking sanctuary. But the system needs to be controlled and managed and we need strong borders. The small boats crisis, fuelled by dangerous criminal smuggler gangs, is undermining our security and costing lives.

Rather than a serious plan to confront this crisis, the Conservatives have offered nothing but desperate gimmicks. Their flagship policy – to fly a tiny number of asylum seekers to Rwanda – has already cost hundreds of millions of pounds. Even if it got off the ground, this scheme can only address fewer than one per cent of the asylum seekers arriving. It cannot work. Chaos in the Channel has been matched by chaos at home. The Conservatives’ unworkable laws have created a ‘perma-backlog’ of tens of thousands of asylum seekers, who are indefinitely staying in hotels costing the taxpayer millions of pounds every week.

Labour will stop the chaos and go after the criminal gangs who trade in driving this crisis. We will create a new Border Security Command, with hundreds of new investigators, intelligence officers, and cross-border police officers. This will be funded by ending the wasteful Migration and Economic Development partnership with Rwanda. This new Command will work internationally and be supported by new counter-terrorism style powers, to pursue, disrupt, and arrest those responsible for the vile trade. We will seek a new security agreement with the EU to ensure access to real-time intelligence and enable our policing teams to lead joint investigations with their European counterparts.

Labour will turn the page and restore order to the asylum system so that it operates swiftly, firmly, and fairly; and the rules are properly enforced. We will hire additional caseworkers to clear the Conservatives’ backlog and end asylum hotels, saving the taxpayer billions of pounds.

Labour will set up a new returns and enforcement unit, with an additional 1,000 staff, to fast-track removals to safe countries for people who do not have the right to stay here. We will negotiate additional returns arrangements to speed up returns and increase the number of safe countries that failed asylum seekers can swiftly be sent back to. And we will also act upstream, working with international partners to address the humanitarian crises which lead people to flee their homes, and to strengthen support for refugees in their home region.

Economic stability

Every commitment a Labour government makes will be based on sound money and economic stability. This is a non-negotiable principle for our changed Labour Party. Siren voices may claim that there are no limits on what government can spend, or that tax cuts pay for themselves. We reject this flawed ideology that was tested to destruction by the disastrous Conservative ‘mini budget’. The British people are still paying the price of those unfunded commitments through higher mortgage costs, and taxpayers continue to foot the bill through higher interest payments, meaning less money for investment and public services. The impact was not confined to these shores. The Conservatives’ recklessness sent a signal of instability across the world that damaged our standing, making Britain a less attractive place for business to invest.

The chaos is not over. The desperate Conservatives have now made yet more unfunded tax cuts and spending promises at a scale beyond the ‘mini budget’. This would be devastating for families across the country.

Labour will turn the page on this economic chaos. Our approach is based on strong fiscal rules which will govern every single decision we make in government.

Our fiscal rules are that:

The current budget moves into balance, so that day-to-day costs are met by revenues
Debt must be falling as a share of the economy by the fifth year of the forecast.
These rules allow for prudent investment in our economy. This represents a clear break from the Conservatives who have created an incentive to cut investment; a short-term approach that ignores the importance of growing the economy. Labour will strike a balance between prioritising investment and the urgent need to rebuild our public finances. There will be no return to austerity.

Unlike the Conservatives, Labour will never sideline the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) for political convenience. Instead, we will strengthen the role of the OBR. Every fiscal event making significant changes to taxation or spending will be subject to an independent OBR forecast.

Labour will safeguard taxpayers’ money. We will end the link between access to ministers and an inside track for public contracts. We will appoint a fixed-term Covid Corruption Commissioner and use every means possible to recoup public money lost in pandemic-related fraud and from contracts which have not delivered. And we will not tolerate fraud or waste anywhere, whether in social security or the excessive use of consultants.

Alongside strong national finances, Britain needs resilient family finances too. The Conservatives have left families struggling with the cost of living. Labour will take action to support families, by tackling the underlying causes of the crisis.

We will bring down the cost of energy. We will reduce food prices by removing barriers to businesses trading. We will make housing more affordable, expand access to childcare, and make work pay. We will support families with children by introducing free breakfast clubs in every primary school. Labour will also keep mortgage rates as low as possible, with a strong, independent Bank of England – which will continue to target stable inflation of 2 per cent.

The Conservatives have raised the tax burden to a 70-year high. We will ensure taxes on working people are kept as low as possible. Labour will not increase taxes on working people, which is why we will not increase National Insurance, the basic, higher, or additional rates of Income Tax, or VAT.

Labour will address unfairness in the tax system. We will abolish non-dom status once and for all, replacing it with a modern scheme for people genuinely in the country for a short period. We will end the use of offshore trusts to avoid inheritance tax so that everyone who makes their home here in the UK pays their taxes here. Private equity is the only industry where performance-related pay is treated as capital gains. Labour will close this loophole.

We will modernise HMRC and change the law to tackle tax avoidance. We will increase registration and reporting requirements, strengthen HMRC’s powers, invest in new technology and build capacity within HMRC. This, combined with a renewed focus on tax avoidance by large businesses and the wealthy, will begin to close the tax gap and ensure everyone pays their fair share.

Labour will stop the chaos, turn the page, and return to the foundations of national security, secure borders, and economic stability.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Kickstart economic growth

How Labour will kickstart economic growth:

Deliver economic stability with tough spending rules
A new partnership with business to boost growth everywhere
A National Wealth Fund to invest in jobs
Planning reform to build 1.5 million new homes
Devolution of power across England
A New Deal for Working People

Sustained economic growth is the only route to improving the prosperity of our country and the living standards of working people. That is why it is Labour’s first mission for government. It means being pro-business and pro-worker. We are the party of wealth creation.

This election follows the chaos of the Conservatives’ ‘mini-budget’ and an unprecedented fall in living standards. Their miserable economic record over the past 14 years has seen productivity and wages flatlining, leaving British families significantly poorer than those in France or Germany.

This decline is rooted in two failures.

First, an inability to accept that a strong economy can only be built on the contribution of every community and every person – the many not the few. Second, a failure to acknowledge that sustainable growth requires government to be a strategic partner with business – that markets must be shaped, not merely served.

These twin failures have led to greater economic insecurity – in the financial resilience of households, but also in our national economy – at the very time when our world has become less stable and secure. The Conservatives have failed to grasp the implications of a new era of rising global competition and tension, instead leaving our economy on an increasingly shallow and insecure footing.

It is time to turn the page. Labour will restore stability, increase investment, and reform our economy.

We will embrace a new approach to economic management – securonomics – that understands sustainable growth relies on a broad base and resilient foundations. Our approach will depend on a dynamic and strategic state. This does not mean ever-growing government, but it does mean a more active, smarter government that works in partnership with business, trade unions, local leaders, and devolved governments.

Labour will stop the chaos and support business through a stable policy environment – strengthening our economic institutions, and giving investors the certainty they need to fuel growth. Labour will seek involvement from industry, trade unions, and civil society in our plans for growth, so they can contribute to building a stronger economy in all parts of the country. We will strategically use public investment where it can unlock additional private sector investment, create jobs, and provide a return for taxpayers.

While stability and greater investment will support growth, parts of our economy require substantial reform if we are to create the wealth our country needs. Britain is hampered by a planning regime that means we struggle to build either the infrastructure or housing the country needs.

The country remains too centralised, with the economic potential of too many regions and communities ignored. Our labour market fails to provide secure jobs and, as a result, for far too many people work does not pay.

The innovation, dynamism and sheer hard work of British business and workers has never been in question. The next Labour government will partner with them to kickstart economic growth and rebuild Britain.
“Labour’s plan for the economy is good news for my customers and colleagues in high streets across the country. Labour will bring stability, good jobs and higher living standards. As a business leader, I am sick and tired of chaos under the Conservatives. I am absolutely convinced that Keir Starmer is the leader to deliver the change this country needs. Labour will end division, strengthen our communities and protect the environment. That’s why I’ll be voting Labour and I urge you to do the same.”

– Richard Walker OBE, Executive Chairman of Iceland


Strategic partnership through industrial strategy

Labour will introduce a new industrial strategy. Our approach will be mission-driven and focused on the future. We will work in partnership with industry to seize opportunities and remove barriers to growth. Critically, we will end short-term economic policy making with the establishment of an Industrial Strategy Council, on a statutory footing, to provide expert advice. We will ensure representation on the Council from all nations and regions, business and trade unions, to drive economic growth in all parts of the country.

Labour will take a sectoral approach and be clear-eyed about where the UK enjoys advantages over other countries. Our approach will back what makes Britain great: our excellent research institutions, professional services, advanced manufacturing, and creative industries. We will ensure a pro-business environment, with a competition and regulatory framework, that supports innovation, investment, and high-quality jobs. Procurement and trade policy will also be aligned with our industrial strategy priorities.

Financial services are one of Britain’s greatest success stories. Labour will create the conditions to support innovation and growth in the sector, through supporting new technology, including Open Banking and Open Finance and ensuring a pro-innovation regulatory framework.

Our other great British industries need certainty over the policies that will apply to them. In opposition, Labour has worked with the automotive, life sciences, and creative sectors, on the approach we will take to policy. In government, we will set out plans for these and other vital sectors of the economy.

Boosting investment

Business has for too long been hampered by a government that does not work with it. As a result, investment in the UK is too low. To address this long-standing problem Labour will use every available lever. Public investment, where it supports and de-risks additional private investment, is one important tool being used successfully across the world. It can create good jobs across the country and would mean British taxpayers can reap the benefits of economic growth. To realise these opportunities Labour will establish a National Wealth Fund.

Capitalised with £7.3 billion over the course of the next Parliament, the National Wealth Fund will have a remit to support Labour’s growth and clean energy missions, making transformative investments across every part of the country. The fund will have a target of attracting three pounds of private investment for every one pound of public investment, creating jobs across the country. We plan to allocate:

£1.8 billion to upgrade ports and build supply chains across the UK
£1.5 billion to new gigafactories so our automotive industry leads the world
£2.5 billion to rebuild our steel industry
£1 billion to accelerate the deployment of carbon capture
£500 million to support the manufacturing of green hydrogen.
Labour will also act to increase investment from pension funds in UK markets. We will adopt reforms to ensure that workplace pension schemes take advantage of consolidation and scale, to deliver better returns for UK savers and greater productive investment for UK PLC. We will also undertake a review of the pensions landscape to consider what further steps are needed to improve pension outcomes and increase investment in UK markets.
Labour’s first steps for change: delivering economic stability
Business taxation

The business tax regime matters for investors. It is not just the rates of tax that matter, but also certainty. Under the Conservatives there has been constant chopping and changing – corporation tax has changed 26 times – and multiple fiscal events have made drastic changes often at little notice.

Labour will stop the chaos, and turn the page with a strategic approach that gives certainty and allows long-term planning. We are committed to one major fiscal event a year, giving families and businesses due warning of tax and spending policies. We will publish a roadmap for business taxation for the next parliament which will allow businesses to plan investments with confidence.

Labour will cap corporation tax at the current level of 25 per cent, the lowest in the G7, for the entire parliament, and we will act if tax changes in other countries pose a risk to UK competitiveness. We will retain a permanent full expensing system for capital investment and the annual investment allowance for small business. And we will give firms greater clarity on what qualifies for allowances to improve business investment decisions.

The current business rates system disincentivises investment, creates uncertainty and places an undue burden on our high streets. In England, Labour will replace the business rates system, so we can raise the same revenue but in a fairer way. This new system will level the playing field between the high street and online giants, better incentivise investment, tackle empty properties and support entrepreneurship.

Economic infrastructure

Britain is grinding to a halt. Rail cancellations are at record levels, energy prices have risen faster here than in any other country in Western Europe, and not a single reservoir has been built in the last 30 years. This is not an accident. Conservative chaos has seen major projects abandoned, decades-long delays, cost overruns, uncertainty for supply chains, and our infrastructure crumbling.

Labour will end this chaos by developing a ten-year infrastructure strategy, aligned with our industrial strategy and regional development priorities, including improving rail connectivity across the north of England. The strategy will guide investment plans and give the private sector certainty about the project pipeline. We will work closely with business to map and address the delivery challenges we face. We will create a new National Infrastructure and Service Transformation Authority, bringing together existing bodies, to set strategic infrastructure priorities and oversee the design, scope, and delivery of projects.

The current planning regime acts as a major brake on economic growth. Labour will make the changes we need to forge ahead with new roads, railways, reservoirs, and other nationally significant infrastructure. We will set out new national policy statements, make major projects faster and cheaper by slashing red tape, and build support for developments by ensuring communities directly benefit. We will also update national planning policy to ensure the planning system meets the needs of a modern economy, making it easier to build laboratories, digital infrastructure, and gigafactories. Labour will ensure economic regulation supports growth and investment, promotes competition, works for consumers, and enables innovation.

In an ever more connected world, Britain’s communication network is also vital. Under the Conservatives, investment in 5G is falling behind other countries and the rollout of gigabit broadband has been slow. Labour will make a renewed push to fulfil the ambition of full gigabit and national 5G coverage by 2030.

Royal Mail remains a key part of the UK’s infrastructure. Labour will ensure that any proposed takeover is robustly scrutinised and that appropriate guarantees are forthcoming that protect the interests of the workforce, customers and the United Kingdom, including the need to maintain a comprehensive universal service obligation.

Labour will also explore new business and governance models for Royal Mail so that workers and customers who rely on Royal Mail services can have a stronger voice in the governance and strategic direction of the company.

“Change is overdue”
Charlie, cafe owner and former Conservative voter

A modern transport network

Rebuilding Britain means modernising our transport infrastructure. Our road network is plagued by long-promised projects that are never delivered. The potholes cratering our roads are a visible sign of the decline after 14 years of Conservative rule.

Cars remain by far the most popular form of transport. Labour will maintain and renew our road network, to ensure it serves drivers, cyclists and other road users, remains safe, and tackles congestion. We will fix an additional one million potholes across England in each year of the next parliament, funded by deferring the A27 bypass, which is poor value for money. Labour will further support drivers by tackling the soaring cost of car insurance. And, as set out in our automotive sector plan, Labour will support the transition to electric vehicles by accelerating the roll out of charge points, giving certainty to manufacturers by restoring the phase-out date of 2030 for new cars with internal combustion engines, and supporting buyers of second-hand electric cars by standardising the information supplied on the condition of batteries.

Labour will overhaul Britain’s railways. Fourteen years of Conservative neglect have failed passengers, businesses and taxpayers. We will put passengers at the heart of the service by reforming the railways and bringing them into public ownership. We will do this as contracts with existing operators expire or are broken through a failure to deliver, without costing taxpayers a penny in compensation. Great British Railways will deliver a unified system that focuses on reliable, affordable, high-quality, and efficient services; along with ensuring safety and accessibility. It will be responsible for investment, day-to-day operational delivery and innovations and improvements for passengers, working with publicly-owned rail operators in Wales and Scotland. Mayors will have a role in designing the services in their areas. There will be a duty to promote and grow the use of rail freight. Open access operators are an important part of the rail system and will have an ongoing role. Labour will also create a tough new passenger watchdog, focused on driving up standards.

Local communities have lost control over their bus routes. Fares have increased, routes have disappeared, and services are unreliable. Building on the work of Labour mayors, we will reform the broken system through new powers for local leaders to franchise local bus services, and we will lift the ban on municipal ownership. This will give local communities in England control over routes and schedules.

Under the Conservatives, transport services have remained fragmented and inefficient with companies and sectors failing to speak to and plan with each other. Labour will give mayors the power to create unified and integrated transport systems, allowing for more seamless journeys, and to promote active travel networks. Labour will also develop a long-term strategy for transport, ensuring transport infrastructure can be delivered efficiently and on time. Labour will secure the UK aviation industry’s long-term future, including through promoting sustainable aviation fuels, and encouraging airspace modernisation.

Driving innovation

Delivering growth and raising productivity depend on fresh thinking and new ideas. Britain has many cutting-edge businesses, but innovation needs to be converted into commercial success in every corner of our country. Labour will make Britain the best place to start and grow a business.

We will ensure our industrial strategy supports the development of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) sector, removes planning barriers to new datacentres. And we will create a National Data Library to bring together existing research programmes and help deliver data-driven public services, whilst maintaining strong safeguards and ensuring all of the public benefit.

Labour will scrap short funding cycles for key R&D institutions in favour of ten-year budgets that allow meaningful partnerships with industry to keep the UK at the forefront of global innovation. We will work with universities to support spinouts; and work with industry to ensure start-ups have the access to finance they need to grow. We will also simplify the procurement process to support innovation and reduce micromanagement with a mission-driven approach.

Regulators are currently ill-equipped to deal with the dramatic development of new technologies, which often cut across traditional industries and sectors. Labour will create a new Regulatory Innovation Office, bringing together existing functions across government. This office will help regulators update regulation, speed up approval timelines, and co-ordinate issues that span existing boundaries. Labour will ensure the safe development and use of AI models by introducing binding regulation on the handful of companies developing the most powerful AI models and by banning the creation of sexually explicit deepfakes.

Labour will support diverse business models which bring innovation and new products to the market. This includes the co-operative sector, and we will aim to double the size of the UK’s co-operative and mutuals sector. We will work with the sector to address the barriers they face, such as accessing finance.
Support for small business and the self-employed

Labour’s plan for economic growth has been developed for all UK businesses. But small firms, entrepreneurs, and the self- employed face unique challenges. That is why, in partnership, Labour has developed a plan for small businesses – the lifeblood of communities and high streets across the country.

We will take action on late payments to ensure small businesses and the self-employed are paid on time. We will improve guidance and remove barriers to exporting for small businesses. Reform of the British Business Bank, including a stronger mandate to support growth in the regions and nations, will make it easier for small and medium sized enterprises to access capital. We will also reform procurement rules to give them greater access to government contracts.

The Post Office is an essential service in communities across the country. Labour will look for ways to strengthen the Post Office network, in consultation with sub-postmasters, trade unions and customers, and support the development of new products, services and business models, such as banking hubs, that will help reinvigorate the high street. We will also ensure justice and compensation are delivered swiftly for those sub-postmasters shamefully affected by the Horizon IT scandal.

Get Britain building again

The dream of homeownership is now out of reach for too many young people. The Conservatives have failed to act even though the housing crisis is well known to be one of the country’s biggest barriers to growth. Labour will get Britain building again, creating jobs across England, with 1.5 million new homes over the next parliament.

We will immediately update the National Policy Planning Framework to undo damaging Conservative changes, including restoring mandatory housing targets. We will take tough action to ensure that planning authorities have up-to-date Local Plans and reform and strengthen the presumption in favour of sustainable development. Labour will support local authorities by funding additional planning officers, through increasing the rate of the stamp duty surcharge paid by non-UK residents. We will ensure local communities continue to shape housebuilding in their area, but where necessary Labour will not be afraid to make full use of intervention powers to build the houses we need.

Labour will take a brownfield first approach, prioritising the development of previously used land wherever possible, and fast-tracking approval of urban brownfield sites. But brownfield development alone will not be enough to meet our housing need.

Labour is committed to preserving the green belt which has served England’s towns and cities well over many decades. Under the Conservatives, greenbelt land is regularly released for development but haphazardly and often for speculative housebuilding. Without changing its purpose or general extent, Labour will take a more strategic approach to greenbelt land designation and release to build more homes in the right places. The release of lower quality ‘grey belt’ land will be prioritised and we will introduce ‘golden rules’ to ensure development benefits communities and nature.

In partnership with local leaders and communities, a Labour government will build a new generation of new towns, inspired by the proud legacy of the 1945 Labour government. Alongside urban extensions and regeneration projects, these will form part of a series of large-scale new communities across England.

Housing need in England cannot be met without planning for growth on a larger than local scale so we will introduce effective new mechanisms for cross-boundary strategic planning. Labour will require all Combined and Mayoral Authorities to strategically plan for housing growth in their areas. We will give Combined Authorities new planning powers along with new freedoms and flexibilities to make better use of grant funding.

Labour will further reform compulsory purchase compensation rules to improve land assembly, speed up site delivery, and deliver housing, infrastructure, amenity, and transport benefits in the public interest. We will take steps to ensure that for specific types of development schemes, landowners are awarded fair compensation rather than inflated prices based on the prospect of planning permission.

Labour will deliver the biggest increase in social and affordable housebuilding in a generation. We will strengthen planning obligations to ensure new developments provide more affordable homes; make changes to the Affordable Homes Programme to ensure that it delivers more homes from existing funding; and support councils and housing associations to build their capacity and make a greater contribution to affordable housing supply. Labour will prioritise the building of new social rented homes and better protect our existing stock by reviewing the increased right to buy discounts introduced in 2012 and increasing protections on newly-built social housing.

Labour wants exemplary development to be the norm not the exception. We will take steps to ensure we are building more high-quality, well-designed, and sustainable homes and creating places that increase climate resilience and promote nature recovery. We will implement solutions to unlock the building of homes affected by nutrient neutrality without weakening environmental protections.

Labour will work with local authorities to give first-time buyers the first chance to buy homes and end the farce of entire developments being sold off to international investors before houses are even built. And we will introduce a permanent, comprehensive mortgage guarantee scheme, to support first-time buyers who struggle to save for a large deposit, with lower mortgage costs.

Economic growth across the country

Every town and city across the country has a vital contribution to make to our economy. But too many areas have been held back because decisions are often taken in Westminster, and not by local leaders who understand local ambitions and strengths. This means we fail to make the most of the contribution everyone can make, hampering economic growth. So, Labour will transfer power out of Westminster, and into our communities, with landmark devolution legislation to take back control.

In England, Labour will deepen devolution settlements for existing Combined Authorities. We will also widen devolution to more areas, encouraging local authorities to come together and take on new powers. Towns and cities will be able to take hold of the tools they need to pursue growth, create jobs, and improve living standards. Local areas will be able to gain new powers over transport, adult education and skills, housing and planning, and employment support. We will ensure those places have the strong governance arrangements, capacity, and capability to deliver, providing central support where needed.

At the centre of our approach is a new statutory requirement for Local Growth Plans that cover towns and cities across the country. Local leaders will work with major employers, universities, colleges, and industry bodies to produce long-term plans that identify growth sectors and put in place the programmes and infrastructure they need to thrive. These will align with our national industrial strategy.

Labour will review the governance arrangements for Combined Authorities to unblock decision making. We will provide greater flexibility with integrated settlements for Mayoral Combined Authorities that can show exemplary management of public money. On housing and planning we will seek to consolidate powers to allow for improved decision making.

Our approach will require partnership with local authorities. Local government is facing acute financial challenges because of the Conservatives’ economic mismanagement which sent interest rates soaring, along with their failures on public services. To provide greater stability, a Labour government will give councils multi-year funding settlements and end wasteful competitive bidding. We recognise good jobs deliver better services that local communities can rely on. Labour will provide capacity and support to councils, and will overhaul the local audit system, so taxpayers get better value for money.

Improving public services is essential to growing our economy across the country. Public service workers have a critical role to play, but services are suffering from recruitment and retention crises. Labour will act to improve public service workers’ living standards throughout the parliament, and ensure any independent mechanisms have the confidence of all involved.

Labour will also work with the Scottish and Welsh Governments, and the Northern Ireland Executive, to drive growth across the country. Our industrial strategy will support successful industries across all nations of the UK.

A fair and properly managed immigration system

People who have come to the UK to work make a substantial contribution to our economy, our public services, and our communities.

But under the Conservatives, our economy has become overly dependent on workers from abroad to fill skills shortages. As a result, we have seen net migration reach record highs; more than triple the level than at the last election in 2019. The overall level must be properly controlled and managed. Failure to do so reduces the incentives for businesses to train locally. So, Labour will reduce net migration.

We will reform the points-based immigration system so that it is fair and properly managed, with appropriate restrictions on visas, and by linking immigration and skills policy. Labour will not tolerate employers or recruitment agencies abusing the visa system. And we will not stand for breaches of employment law. Employers who flout the rules will be barred from hiring workers from abroad.

Conservative policy is incoherent, with decisions on migration, skills and sectoral pay determined in isolation. Labour will bring joined-up thinking, ensuring that migration to address skills shortages triggers a plan to upskill workers and improve working conditions in the UK. We will strengthen the Migration Advisory Committee, and establish a framework for joint working with skills bodies across the UK, the Industrial Strategy Council and the Department for Work and Pensions. We will end the long-term reliance on overseas workers in some parts of the economy by bringing in workforce and training plans for sectors such as health and social care, and construction.

The days of a sector languishing endlessly on immigration shortage lists with no action to train up workers will come to an end.

Supporting people into work

Too many people are out of work or not earning enough. Long waits for treatment of health conditions, particularly mental health, are contributing to the rise in economic inactivity. Labour will reform employment support so it drives growth and opportunity. Our system will be underpinned by rights and responsibilities – people who can work, should work – and there will be consequences for those who do not fulfil their obligations.

We will bring Jobcentre Plus and the National Careers Service together to provide a national jobs and careers service, focused on getting people into work and helping them get on at work. We will ensure the service is responsive to local employers, inclusive for all users, and works in partnership with other local services.

Labour will work with local areas to create plans to support more disabled people and those with health conditions into work. We will devolve funding so local areas can shape a joined-up work, health, and skills offer for local people. We will tackle the backlog of Access to Work claims and give disabled people the confidence to start working without the fear of an immediate benefit reassessment if it does not work out. We believe the Work Capability Assessment is not working and needs to be reformed or replaced, alongside a proper plan to support disabled people to work.

One in eight young people are not in education, employment, or training, with those lacking good qualifications and with poor mental health facing particular disadvantages. Drawing together existing funding and entitlements, Labour will establish a youth guarantee of access to training, an apprenticeship, or support to find work for all 18- to 21-year-olds, to bring down the number of young people who are not learning or earning. We will also guarantee two weeks’ worth of work experience for every young person, and improve careers advice in schools and colleges.

We will work with the Scottish and Welsh Governments, and Mayors and Combined Authorities in England, to ensure all aspects of our new approach to Jobcentre Plus and employment support partner effectively with devolved provision, to offer the best opportunities for people right across the country.

Making work pay

Greater in-work security, better pay, and more autonomy in the workplace improve the lives of working people and bring substantial economic benefits. Britain’s outdated employment laws are not fit for the modern economy, and recent Conservative legislation has fuelled hostility and confrontation leading to the worst period in industrial relations since the 1980s.

For too many people a job does not offer the route out of poverty it should: either because work is insecure, inflexible, or low paid; or because people face barriers when trying to move into a better job. Responsible businesses face being undercut when rights are not enforced properly.

Labour will stop the chaos and turn the page to create a partnership between business and trade unions, by implementing ‘Labour’s Plan to Make Work Pay: Delivering a New Deal for Working People’ in full – introducing legislation within 100 days. We will consult fully with businesses, workers, and civil society on how to put our plans into practice before legislation is passed. This will include banning exploitative zero hours contracts; ending fire and rehire; and introducing basic rights from day one to parental leave, sick pay, and protection from unfair dismissal. We will strengthen the collective voice of workers, including through their trade unions, and create a Single Enforcement Body to ensure employment rights are upheld. These changes will improve the lives of working people across the entire UK.

Labour will also make sure the minimum wage is a genuine living wage. We will change the remit of the independent Low Pay Commission so for the first time it accounts for the cost of living. Labour will also remove the discriminatory age bands, so all adults are entitled to the same minimum wage, delivering a pay rise to hundreds of thousands of workers across the UK.

Labour will stop the chaos, turn the page, and kickstart economic growth by reforming our economy.
Help deliver change to Britain.

Make Britain a clean energy superpower

How Labour will make Britain a clean energy superpower:

Set up Great British Energy to cut bills for good
Energy independence from dictators like Putin
650,000 new high-quality jobs
Warmer homes to slash fuel poverty
Water companies forced to clean up our rivers

The climate and nature crisis is the greatest long-term global challenge that we face. The clean energy transition represents a huge opportunity to generate growth, tackle the cost-of-living crisis and make Britain energy independent once again. That is why clean energy by 2030 is Labour’s second mission.

The Conservatives have failed to grasp opportunities in this area for two related reasons. First, because they simply do not accept that economic growth, energy security, lower bills, and addressing climate change can be complementary. Second, because they are ideologically opposed to using the role of the state, including public investment, to guarantee that they are.

The damage done by 14 years of chaotic ‘sticking plaster’ policies was exposed when Putin invaded Ukraine. The cost of fossil fuel energy on the international market rocketed. The Conservatives’ ban on new onshore wind, failure to build new nuclear power stations, and decision to scrap investment in home insulation landed British families with amongst the highest energy bills in Europe. That is just one way we are paying the price. While countries around the world are racing ahead to claim the jobs and wealth that the transition offers, Britain is losing out.

But it is not too late to stop the chaos and turn the page.

We have tremendous untapped advantages: our long coast- line, high winds, shallow waters, universities, and skilled offshore workforce combined with our extensive technological and engineering capabilities. With a serious industrial strategy and a genuine partnership between the public and private sectors, we can make Britain a clean energy superpower.
Labour will take decisive action to seize this economic opportunity. We will shape markets, and use public investment to crowd in private funding. At the heart of our approach will be our Green Prosperity Plan where, in partnership with business through our National Wealth Fund, we will invest in the industries of the future. Our plan will create 650,000 jobs across the country by 2030.

We will end the chaotic Conservative chopping and changing on policy, harness clean power to boost our energy security, and invest in home insulation upgrades. We will save families hundreds of pounds on their bills, not just in the short term, but for good.

We will provide leadership at home so we can influence others to ensure every country plays their part in meeting our collective obligations to future generations.

At home we will also tackle the Conservatives’ nature emergency, including the unforgivable pollution of our rivers and seas. We will improve access to nature, promote biodiversity, and protect our landscapes and wildlife.

Labour understands the road ahead. We have been clear that this transition presents an opportunity to create good jobs, with no community left behind, and support well-paying jobs in existing and future industries. The Conservatives propose an alternative course. A denial of reality; delaying action; increasing costs for Britain; exposing us to insecurity; and a failure to win the jobs of the future. They tried this chaotic approach in the 1970s and 80s, and communities are still scarred by what happened. That is the choice facing Britain.

“A national mission for clean power by 2030 is achievable and should be prioritised. We desperately need to end the era of high energy bills, excessive carbon emissions and energy insecurity by accelerating the transition to clean, homegrown energy. Britain can lead on this by treating this mission like the vaccine challenge. We can be the innovators and the implementers, helping ourselves and exporting our solutions worldwide. But if we choose to go slowly, others will provide the answers, and ultimately we’ll end up buying these solutions rather than selling them.”
– Sir Patrick Vallance, Former Chief Scientific Adviser

Clean power by 2030

Families and businesses will have lower bills for good, from a zero-carbon electricity system. We have chosen this mission not because it is easy, but because working people can never again be left vulnerable to dictators like Putin.

To deliver our clean power mission, Labour will work with the private sector to double onshore wind, triple solar power, and quadruple offshore wind by 2030. We will invest in carbon capture and storage, hydrogen and marine energy, and ensure we have the long-term energy storage our country needs. A new Energy Independence Act will establish the framework for Labour’s energy and climate policies.

Labour will end a decade of dithering that has seen the Conservatives duck decisions on nuclear power. We will ensure the long-term security of the sector, extending the lifetime of existing plants, and we will get Hinkley Point C over the line. New nuclear power stations, such as Sizewell C, and Small Modular Reactors, will play an important role in helping the UK achieve energy security and clean power while securing thousands of good, skilled jobs.

Labour will maintain a strategic reserve of gas power stations to guarantee security of supply. We will ensure a phased and responsible transition in the North Sea that recognises the proud history of our offshore industry and the brilliance of its workforce, particularly in Scotland and the North East of England, and the ongoing role of oil and gas in our energy mix.

We will embrace the future of energy production and storage which will make use of existing offshore infrastructure and the skills of our offshore workforce. Labour will not revoke existing licences and we will partner with business and workers to manage our existing fields for the entirety of their lifespan. Crucially, oil and gas production in the North Sea will be with us for decades to come, and the North Sea will be managed in a way that does not jeopardise jobs. And our offshore workers will lead the world in the industries of the future.

We will not issue new licences to explore new fields because they will not take a penny off bills, cannot make us energy secure, and will only accelerate the worsening climate crisis. In addition, we will not grant new coal licences and will ban fracking for good.

To support investment in this plan, Labour will close the loopholes in the windfall tax on oil and gas companies. Companies have benefitted from enormous profits not because of their ingenuity or investment, but because of an energy shock which raised prices for British families. Labour will therefore extend the sunset clause in the Energy Profits Levy until the end of the next parliament. We will also increase the rate of the levy by three percentage points, as well as removing the unjustifiably generous investment allowances. Labour will also retain the Energy Security Investment Mechanism.
Switch on Great British Energy

To drive forward investment in clean, home-grown energy production, Labour will create a new publicly-owned company, Great British Energy. It will be owned by the British people and deliver power back to the British people.

Great British Energy will partner with industry and trade unions to deliver clean power by co-investing in leading technologies; will help support capital-intensive projects; and will deploy local energy production to benefit communities across the country. To support this, Labour will capitalise Great British Energy with £8.3 billion, over the next parliament.

The company will create jobs and build supply chains in every corner of the UK. Scotland will be the powerhouse of our clean energy mission, with Great British Energy headquartered there.

Local power generation is an essential part of the energy mix and reduces pressures on the transmission grid. Labour will deploy more distributed production capacity through our Local Power Plan. Great British Energy will partner with energy companies, local authorities, and co-operatives to install thousands of clean power projects, through a combination of onshore wind, solar, and hydropower projects. We will invite communities to come forward with projects, and work with local leaders and devolved governments to ensure local people benefit directly from this energy production.

“I’ve never struggled this much to keep warm”
Gary, pensioner

Energy system reform

Under the Conservatives, the broken energy market has let customers down. The government has allowed scandalous abuses on their watch, including poor customer service, companies going to the wall with the costs falling on billpayers, and the mass forced installation of pre-payment meters.

Labour will ensure a much tougher system of regulation that puts consumers first and attracts the investment needed to cut bills. Too much of the burden of the bill is on standing charges and we will work with the regulator to reduce them. We will strengthen the regulator to ensure it can hold companies to account for wrongdoing, require higher standards of performance, and ensure there is automatic customer compensation for failure.
The national grid has become the single biggest obstacle to the deployment of cheap, clean power generation and the electrification of industry. With grid connection dates not being offered until the late 2030s, important business and infrastructure investment is being stalled or lost overseas. Labour will work with industry to upgrade our national transmission infrastructure and rewire Britain.

High-quality jobs

As Britain becomes a clean energy superpower, Labour is determined that we will create new high-quality jobs, working with business and trade unions, as we manage the transition. We will rebuild supply chains at home. And, as the first major economy to transition to a clean-energy system, we will export the technologies of the future.

Labour’s National Wealth Fund will directly invest in ports, hydrogen and industrial clusters in every corner of the country. We will also secure the future of Britain’s automotive and steel industries.
We will reward clean energy developers with a British Jobs Bonus, allocating up to £500 million per year from 2026, to incentivise firms who offer good jobs, terms and conditions and build their manufacturing supply chains in our industrial heartlands, coastal areas, and energy communities.

Labour will end the injustice of the Mineworkers’ Pension Scheme. We will review the unfair surplus arrangements and transfer the Investment Reserve Fund back to members, so that the mineworkers who powered our country receive a fairer pension.

Warm homes plan

The energy shock of recent years has highlighted the urgent importance of improving energy efficiency in British homes. Labour will invest an extra £6.6 billion over the next parliament, doubling the existing planned government investment, to upgrade five million homes to cut bills for families.

The Warm Homes Plan will offer grants and low interest loans to support investment in insulation and other improvements such as solar panels, batteries and low carbon heating to cut bills. We will partner with combined authorities, local and devolved governments, to roll out this plan. Labour will also work with the private sector, including banks and building societies, to provide further private finance to accelerate home upgrades and low carbon heating. We will ensure homes in the private rented sector meet minimum energy efficiency standards by 2030, saving renters hundreds of pounds per year. Nobody will be forced to rip out their boiler as a result of our plans.

Labour will save families hundreds of pounds, slash fuel poverty, and get Britain back on track to meet our climate targets. Our plan will mean good skilled jobs for tradespeople in every part of the country.

Accelerating to net zero

British industry is also held back by high electricity costs, which has often made investing here uncompetitive. Labour’s clean energy mission will drive down those bills, making British businesses internationally competitive while our National Wealth Fund supports the most energy intensive sectors to decarbonise.

Labour supports the introduction of a carbon border adjustment mechanism. This will protect British industries as we decarbonise, prevent countries from dumping lower-quality goods into British markets, and support the UK to meet our climate objectives.

Labour will ensure the institutional framework for policy making reflects our commitments to reach net zero and meet our carbon budgets. The Conservatives’ decision to prevent the Bank of England giving due consideration to climate change in its mandates will be reversed.

Britain’s world-leading financial services industry has a major role to play in mobilising trillions of pounds in private capital to address the greatest long-term challenge of our age. Labour will make the UK the green finance capital of the world, mandating UK-regulated financial institutions – including banks, asset managers, pension funds, and insurers – and FTSE 100 companies to develop and implement credible transition plans that align with the 1.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement.

Improving resilience

Preparing for the future not only means tackling the climate and nature emergencies, but also adapting to the changes they will bring to our environment. Without action, flooding and coastal erosion will pose greater risks to lives, livelihoods and people’s wellbeing. The Conservatives’ poor risk management, and a disjointed approach across government and regulators have left Britain badly exposed.

Labour will improve resilience and preparation across central government, local authorities, local communities, and emergency services. This includes formally working with all stakeholders in the Fire and Rescue services to inform policy and establish national standards.

Protecting nature

The climate crisis has accelerated the nature crisis. Whilst Britain enjoys remarkable natural beauty, the Conservatives have left Britain one of the most nature-depleted countries in the world. Labour will deliver for nature, taking action to meet our Environment Act targets, and will work in partnership with civil society, communities and business to restore and protect our natural world.

As part of our plans to improve responsible access to nature, Labour will create nine new National River Walks, one in each region of England, and establish three new National Forests in England, whilst planting millions of trees and creating new woodlands. Labour will expand nature-rich habitats such as wetlands, peat bogs and forests so families can explore and wildlife can thrive, including on public land. Labour is committed to reducing waste by moving to a circular economy.

Clean water

Britain’s coasts, rivers, and lakes are being polluted by illegal sewage dumping. The Conservatives have turned a blind eye and weakened rather than strengthened regulation, with serious damage being done to our countryside, our tourism industry, and people’s health.

Labour will put failing water companies under special measures to clean up our water. We will give regulators new powers to block the payment of bonuses to executives who pollute our waterways and bring criminal charges against persistent law breakers. We will impose automatic and severe fines for wrongdoing and ensure independent monitoring of every outlet.

Supporting British farmers

Labour recognises that food security is national security. That is why we will champion British farming whilst protecting the environment. We will set a target for half of all food purchased across the public sector to be locally produced or certified to higher environmental standards. We will introduce a land-use framework and make environment land management schemes work for farmers and nature. And we will work with farmers and scientists on measures to eradicate Bovine TB, protecting livelihoods, so that we can end the ineffective badger cull.

Stronger animal welfare

Labour will improve animal welfare. We will ban trail hunting and the import of hunting trophies. We will end puppy smuggling and farming, along with the use of snare traps. And we will partner with scientists, industry, and civil society as we work towards the phasing out of animal testing.

Labour will end the climate and energy chaos, turn the page on 14 years of failed policies, and make Britain a clean energy superpower.


Help deliver change to Britain.

Take back our streets

How Labour will take back our streets:

Crack down on antisocial behaviour with more neighbourhood police
Tough new penalties for offenders
A plan to get knives off our streets
A specialist rape unit in every police force
A new network of Young Futures hubs

Labour has a straightforward vision for policing and criminal justice.

When you call the police, they should come. When you report a crime, it should be properly investigated no matter who you are, or where you live. Police should have the trust of communities. Victims must have faith that justice will be delivered, and criminals will be punished. Prisons should not be academies of crime. These are not outlandish expectations. They are the basics of a safe, secure, law-abiding society.

Sadly, this vision is a world away from Britain today. Our sense of security has been badly eroded. Serious violence is too high. Growing numbers of young people are drawn into gangs, drug dealing and violence at ever earlier ages. Antisocial behaviour blights our town and city centres. Fewer criminals are being caught and punished. More victims are being let down.

This is not an accident, but the result of Conservative choices over the last 14 years. Community policing has been downgraded, with neighbourhood officers pulled off the beat to plug shortages elsewhere, weakening connections with communities they serve. Trust in the police has been undermined by failures in vetting and appalling misconduct of some officers. Powers to combat antisocial behaviour and shoplifting have been weakened, leaving our town centres exposed. Our justice system has been allowed to grind to a halt.

This must change. Labour will restore neighbourhood policing with thousands of extra officers, and we will equip officers with the powers they need. We will tackle the epidemic of serious violence, with a greater focus on prevention, including by holding those companies and executives cashing in on knife crime personally to account. We will no longer tolerate the violence against women and girls that stains our society. And we will reform the justice system to put the needs of victims first, tackle the prisons crisis and cut reoffending.

In short, Labour will stop the Conservative chaos and return law and order to our streets.

Visible neighbourhood policing

Visible neighbourhood policing was the cornerstone of the British consent-based model. In too many areas it has been eroded, leaving the police a reactive service focused on crisis response, rather than preventing crime.

Labour will introduce a new Neighbourhood Policing Guarantee, restoring patrols to our town centres by recruiting thousands of new police officers, police and community support officers, and special constables. Communities and residents will have a named officer to turn to when things go wrong.

These new recruits will be paid for by tackling waste through a new Police Efficiency and Collaboration programme for England and Wales. The programme will set nation-wide standards for procurement and establish shared services and specialist functions to drive down costs.

Cracking down on antisocial behaviour

Antisocial behaviour is not merely a ‘low-level’ nuisance. It hits the poorest communities hardest and, if left unchecked, leads to more serious offending. Yet, the Conservatives weakened enforcement powers. Labour will fix this by introducing new Respect Orders – powers to ban persistent adult offenders from town centres, which will stamp out issues such as public drinking and drug use. Fly-tippers and vandals will also be forced to clean up the mess they have created.

With shoplifting soaring, retail workers increasingly find themselves in harm’s way. Labour will scrap the effective immunity for some shoplifting introduced by the Conservatives and create a new specific offence for assaults on shopworkers that will protect them from threats and violence.

Knife crime action plan

Knife crime has been rising for a decade, claiming far too many young lives. It is a national crisis, requiring urgent action. Yet, under the Conservatives, too often when a teenager is found with a knife, nothing happens, and carrying a knife becomes normalised. There are virtually no services for vulnerable teenagers at risk of being drawn into a life of violence. The next Labour government will change this. We aim to halve knife crime in a decade.

Labour will end the practice of empty warnings by ensuring knife carrying triggers rapid intervention and tough consequences. Every young person caught in possession of a knife will be referred to a Youth Offending Team and will receive a mandatory plan to prevent reoffending, with penalties including curfews, tagging, and custody for the most serious cases.

To get knives off our streets Labour will ban ninja swords, lethal zombie-style blades and machetes, and strengthen rules to prevent online sales. Executives of online companies that flout these rules will be personally held to account through tough sanctions.

Labour will intervene earlier to stop young people being drawn into crime, creating a new Young Futures programme with a network of hubs reaching every community. These hubs will have youth workers, mental health support workers, and careers advisers on hand to support young people’s mental health and avoid them being drawn into crime.

We will not wait for those at risk to come forward. Local prevention partnerships will identify young people who could be drawn into violence and intervene. And to offer young people a pathway out of violence, we will place youth workers and mentors in A&E units and Pupil Referral Units, funded by full recovery of the cost of firearm licensing.

Labour will also introduce a new offence of criminal exploitation of children, to go after the gangs who are luring young people into violence and crime.

“This was preventable. It’s the result of police cuts and the Conservatives serving themselves.”
Nour: sister, aunt and campaigner for Raneem’s law

Tackling violence against women and girls

For too long, violence against women and girls has been ignored. Our landmark mission to halve violence against women and girls in a decade will require a national effort. We will use every government tool available to target perpetrators and address the root causes of abuse and violence.

That starts with tougher enforcement and protection. With Labour, there will be specialist rape and sexual offences teams in every police force. The most prolific and harmful perpetrators will be relentlessly targeted, using tactics normally reserved for terrorists and organised crime.

Prosecution rates for rape are shamefully low with many victims dropping out of the justice system when faced with years of delays. Labour will fast-track rape cases, with specialist courts at every Crown Court location in England and Wales.

Victims deserve better support. Building on the success of the approach adopted by Labour Police and Crime Commissioners, we will introduce domestic abuse experts in 999 control rooms so that victims can talk directly to a specialist, and ensure there is a legal advocate in every police force area to advise victims from the moment of report to trial.

Violence and abuse against women and girls does not come from nowhere. Misogyny is one root cause, and therefore Labour will ensure schools address misogyny and teach young people about healthy relationships and consent. We will ensure police forces have the powers they need to track and tackle the problem.

Stalking has not been treated with the seriousness it deserves. Labour will strengthen the use of Stalking Protection Orders and give women the right to know the identity of online stalkers. Spiking is a devastating crime for victims, leaving many women feeling vulnerable when they go out. Labour will introduce a new criminal offence for spiking to help police better respond to this crime.

We will strengthen the rights and protections available to women in co-habiting couples, as well as for whistleblowers in the workplace, including on sexual harassment.

Better policing

Under the Conservatives, poor policing performance has been tolerated, with forces spending years in special measures. Trust in the police has been undermined by the appalling acts of some officers. Labour will turn the page and raise standards by reforming the police.

Labour will give His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary, Fire & Rescue Services new powers to intervene with failing forces. We will introduce mandatory professional standards on vetting, checks and misconduct for individual officers; and stronger training on racism and violence against women and girls. Anyone with a history of violence against women and girls will be barred from the service and we will introduce automatic suspensions if officers are investigated for domestic abuse and sexual offences. Particular care is required when investigating children. Labour will introduce new legal safeguards around strip-searching children and young people.

Fraud accounts for almost two in five crimes, but the Conservatives have failed to respond to the scale of the challenge. Labour will introduce a new expanded fraud strategy to tackle the full range of threats, including online, public sector and serious fraud. We will work with technology companies to stop their platforms being exploited by fraudsters.

Criminals never stop looking for new ways to target victims. Police must change the way they operate too, with technology and investigative techniques keeping pace with modern threats. We will work with national policing bodies and police staff to standardise approaches to procurement, IT, professional standards and training. And we will ensure the service is organised so as to enable investment in specialist capabilities, such as digital forensics, and to more effectively tackle cross-border issues such as serious organised crime.

“Labour has serious and credible plans to take back our streets, with ambitious missions to halve serious violence – including knife crime – finally tackle the scrouge of violence against women and girls, and rebuild public confidence in policing by getting bobbies back on the beat. These plans will require us to do things differently and to work hard to offer better protection to our communities. But they can only happen if you vote for them.”

– Gavin Thomas, Former Detective Chief Superintendent and Former President of the Police Superintendents Association

Solving crime

Under the Conservatives, plummeting charge and prosecution rates have emboldened criminals. Rather than working together, police and prosecutors often engage in a blame game, which lets down victims.

Labour will reverse this, driving up the proportion of crimes solved by reducing barriers to bringing charges, cutting bureaucracy, and improving collaboration. We will make it easier for high-performing police forces to charge domestic abuse suspects to speed up the process.

Labour recognises recruitment challenges, particularly for detectives, so we will roll out a direct entry scheme for detectives to boost investigation skills.

A justice system that puts victims first

After 14 years of neglect, the criminal justice system is broken. Victims wait months, sometimes years, for their case to come to trial, unable to move on with their lives. As an initial step to address the courts backlog, Labour will ensure more prosecutors are available by allowing Associate Prosecutors to work on appropriate cases.

We will introduce new protections for victims of crime and persistent antisocial behaviour, by increasing the powers of the Victims’ Commissioner, and ensuring victims can access the information and support they need.

Even when criminals are found guilty, the sentences they receive often do not make sense either to victims or the wider public. This is particularly worrying for offences against women and girls. Labour will carry out a review of sentencing to ensure it is brought up to date.

Getting a grip of our prisons and reducing reoffending

Prisons in England and Wales are in crisis. The Conservatives’ failure to build sufficient places has led to overcrowding and chaos. Judges are being advised to delay sentencing. Prisoners are being released early. And fewer dangerous criminals are locked up because of a lack of space.

The Conservatives have failed to get prisons built. Labour recognises that prisons are of national importance and therefore will use all relevant powers to build the prisons so badly needed.

As a result of overcrowding, our prisons are increasingly dangerous, plagued by drug use and violent disorder – putting prison officers in a dangerous position. Far from being places where offenders are punished and rehabilitated, prisons are a breeding ground for more crime. Prison leavers are more likely to reoffend if they do not have the tools to move away from crime, if they have nowhere to live and if they do not have a job on release.

Labour will act to reduce reoffending. We will work with prisons to improve offenders’ access to purposeful activity, such as learning, and ensure they create pre-release plans for those leaving custody. We will support prisons to link up with local employers and the voluntary sector to get ex-offenders into work. The children of those who are imprisoned are at far greater risk of being drawn into crime than their peers. We will ensure that those young people are identified and offered support to break the cycle.

After 14 years of chaotic reorganisations, the national probation service is struggling to keep the public safe. A lack of co-ordination between prisons, probation and other local services also means prison-leavers are not getting the right support, raising the risk that they go straight back to crime.

In some areas of the country, we have seen Labour Mayors pioneering a more joined-up approach to reduce reoffending. In Greater Manchester, probation is linked up with housing and health services to ensure offenders leaving custody receive the support they need. Labour will conduct a strategic review of probation governance, including considering the benefits of devolved models.

Historical injustices

Under the Conservatives, too many victims of historical injustices have had insult added to injury by years of legal delays. Without justice and the truth, victims and their families cannot move forward. Labour will right this wrong, act on the findings of the Infected Blood Inquiry, and respond to the findings of the Grenfell Inquiry and the Covid-19 Inquiry, to ensure swift resolution.

Labour will introduce a ‘Hillsborough Law’ which will place a legal duty of candour on public servants and authorities, and provide legal aid for victims of disasters or state-related deaths. We will ensure the victims of the appalling Windrush scandal have their voices heard and the compensation scheme is run effectively, with a new Windrush Commissioner. Labour will also ensure, through an investigation or inquiry, that the truth about the events at Orgreave comes to light.

Labour will stop the chaos that lets too many criminals act with impunity, turn the page with stronger policing, and rebuild our criminal justice system.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Break down barriers to opportunity


How Labour will break down barriers to opportunity:

Recruit 6,500 new expert teachers in key subjects
3,000 new primary school-based nurseries
Free breakfast clubs in every primary school
A modern curriculum so young people are ready for work and life
High-quality apprenticeships and specialist technical colleges

Whoever you are, wherever you come from, Britain should be a country where hard work means you can get on in life. Under the Conservatives, this basic promise – that if you work hard, you will enjoy the rewards – has been broken. We are a country where who your parents are – and how much money they have – too often counts for more than your effort and enterprise. Too many people see success as something that happens to others. This is an appalling waste of talent as well as a huge injustice. So, breaking the pernicious link between background and success will be a defining mission for Labour.

First, we must recognise that greater opportunity requires greater security. Tackling economic insecurity – at work, at home, in our communities and public services – is the golden thread that runs through all of Labour’s missions. On that secure foundation, we can build an education system that prepares our children for life, work, and the future.

Our education system is struggling to cope after years of chronic mismanagement under the Conservatives. Childcare and early education are increasingly unaffordable and unavailable. Too many children arrive at primary school not ready to learn. Too many children are not even getting to school. Teachers are burnt out and leaving in droves. Fewer people are participating in apprenticeships and training. Higher education is in crisis. Meanwhile, too many of our young people leave school unprepared for the future.

Labour will transform our education system so that young people get the opportunities they deserve. We will expand our childcare and early‐years system, drive up standards, modernise the school curriculum, reform assessment, and create higher-quality training and employment paths by empowering local communities to develop the skills people need. We will also put employers at the heart of our skills system.

Every child should believe that success belongs to them. Education has so often been the spark that can light a fire within, transforming life chances. It is time to light that fire for the whole country.

Family security

The last Labour government lifted over half a million children and over a million pensioners out of poverty. That progress transformed life chances and ensured security in retirement. The next Labour government will build on that legacy of pursuing opportunity and social justice.

Good work will be the foundation of our approach to tackling poverty and inequality. We will create more good jobs, reform employment support, and make work pay so that many more people benefit from the dignity and purpose of work.

Labour is committed to reviewing Universal Credit so that it makes work pay and tackles poverty. We want to end mass dependence on emergency food parcels, which is a moral scar on our society.

Child poverty has gone up by 700,000 under the Conservatives, with over four million children now growing up in a low-income family. Last year, a million children experienced destitution. This not only harms children’s lives now, it damages their future prospects, and holds back our economic potential as a country. Labour will develop an ambitious strategy to reduce child poverty. We will work with the voluntary sector, faith organisations, trade unions, business, devolved and local government, and communities to bring about change.

We will take initial steps to confront poverty by introducing free breakfast clubs in every primary school, protecting renters from arbitrary eviction, slashing fuel poverty, banning exploitative zero hours contracts, and improving support to help people get into good work.

Our system of state, private, and workplace pensions provide the basis for security in retirement. Labour will retain the triple lock for the state pension. We will also adopt reforms to workplace pensions to deliver better outcomes for UK savers and pensioners. Our pensions review will consider what further steps are needed to improve security in retirement, as well as to increase productive investment in the UK economy.

Security also means having a secure roof over your head. That is not the case for too many renting their homes privately. Labour will legislate where the Conservatives have failed, overhauling the regulation of the private rented sector. We will immediately abolish Section 21 ‘no fault’ evictions, prevent private renters being exploited and discriminated against, empower them to challenge unreasonable rent increases, and take steps to decisively raise standards, including extending ‘Awaab’s Law’ to the private sector.

Labour will also take decisive action to improve building safety, including through regulation, to ensure we never again see a repeat of the Grenfell fire. We will review how to better protect leaseholders from costs and take steps to accelerate the pace of remediation across the country. We will put a renewed focus on ensuring those responsible for the building safety crisis pay to put it right.

For far too many leaseholders, the reality of home ownership falls woefully short of the dream they were promised. Labour will act where the Conservatives have failed and finally bring the feudal leasehold system to an end. We will enact the package of Law Commission proposals on leasehold enfranchisement, right to manage and commonhold. We will take further steps to ban new leasehold flats and ensure commonhold is the default tenure. We will tackle unregulated and unaffordable ground rent charges. We will act to bring the injustice of ‘fleecehold’ private housing estates and unfair maintenance costs to an end.  

The last Labour government made huge strides in ending homelessness. Under the Conservatives, that progress has been undone, with rough sleepers an all-too-common sight in our towns and cities, and a sharp rise in hidden homelessness. Building on the lessons of our past, Labour will develop a new cross-government strategy, working with Mayors and Councils across the country, to put Britain back on track to ending homelessness.
Best start in life

High-quality early education and childcare is a crucial opportunity to transform life chances. Too often it is unavailable, or unaffordable.

As an initial step, Labour will open an additional 3,000 nurseries through upgrading space in primary schools, to deliver the extension of government funded hours families are entitled to.

Supporting children in the early part of their life also means giving parents the flexibility they need to care for their children. Labour will review the parental leave system, so it best supports working families, within our first year in government.

Every child should have a loving, secure home. Labour will work with local government to support children in care, including through kinship, foster care, and adoption, as well as strengthening regulation of the children’s social care sector.

Sadly, too often we see families falling through the cracks of public services. Labour will improve data sharing across services, with a single unique identifier, to better support children and families.

Raising school standards

Labour is determined to raise school standards for every child, and ensure they are prepared for the future. Most children attend schools where the Conservatives are failing to provide the support and teaching that they need. Labour will end the VAT exemption and business rates relief for private schools to invest in our state schools.

The factor that makes the biggest difference to a child’s education is high-quality teaching; but there are shortages of qualified teachers across the country. Labour will recruit an additional 6,500 new expert teachers. We will get more teachers into shortage subjects, support areas that face recruitment challenges, and tackle retention issues. The way bursaries are allocated, and the structure of retention payments, will be reviewed.

Teaching is a hard-earned and hard-learned skill, Labour will work to further raise its status. We will update the Early Career Framework, maintaining its grounding in evidence, and ensure any new teacher entering the classroom has, or is working towards, Qualified Teacher Status. We will introduce a new Teacher Training Entitlement to ensure teachers stay up to date on best practice with continuing professional development.

School support staff play a vital role in children’s education and development. Labour will reinstate the School Support Staff Negotiating Body, which will help address the acute recruitment and retention crisis in support roles.

Raising school standards starts with early education. The last Labour government’s promotion of phonics put rocket boosters under the reading and writing ability of a generation of children. We will do the same for numeracy, improving the quality of maths teaching across nurseries and primary schools.

Developing early communication skills is another key foundation for life, with serious knock-on consequences when development is delayed. Labour will fund evidence-based early-language interventions in primary schools, so that every child can find their voice.

Alongside high-quality teaching, driving up standards in education requires outstanding leadership. Labour will create a new Excellence in Leadership Programme, a mentoring framework that expands the capacity of headteachers and leaders to improve their schools. Labour will introduce new Regional Improvement Teams, to enhance school-to-school support, and spread best practice.

Accountability is non-negotiable, which is why Labour supports school inspection. Under the Conservatives our inspection regime has been broken. A system which declares nine in ten schools are good or outstanding fails to provide sufficient information on school performance. We will enhance the inspection regime by replacing a single headline grade with a new report card system telling parents clearly how schools are performing. We will also bring Multi-Academy Trusts into the inspection system and introduce a new annual review of safeguarding, attendance, and off-rolling.

Every child should have a broad curriculum with an excellent foundation in reading, writing and maths, and support to develop essential digital, speaking, and creative skills. Yet today, too many are missing out. Labour will launch an expert-led review of curriculum and assessment, working with school staff, parents and employers to change this.

Our reforms will build on the hard work of teachers who have brought their subjects alive with knowledge-rich syllabuses, to deliver a curriculum which is rich and broad, inclusive, and innovative. To capture this breadth, our review will consider the right balance of assessment methods whilst protecting the important role of examinations.

Too often our education and care systems do not meet the needs of all children, including those with Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND). Labour will take a community-wide approach, improving inclusivity and expertise in mainstream schools, as well as ensuring special schools cater to those with the most complex needs. We will make sure admissions decisions account for the needs of communities and require all schools to co-operate with their local authority on school admissions, SEND inclusion, and place planning.

Too many children’s life chances are being scarred by rising poverty. Too many arrive at school not ready to learn, and too many are absent. Breakfast clubs improve behaviour, attendance, and learning. Labour will fund free breakfast clubs in every primary school, accessible to all children. Our breakfast clubs will support parents through the cost-of-living crisis. We will also bring down the cost of school by limiting the number of branded items of uniform and PE kit that schools can require.

Poor mental health is another barrier to learning. The struggle to access support is paralysing children and young people through their formative years. Labour will provide access to specialist mental health professionals in every school, so every young person has access to early support to address problems before they escalate. This will complement our plan for Young Futures Hubs, which will make sure every community has an open-access hub for children and young people with drop-in mental health support.
Reforming further and higher education

After years of Conservative chaos and policy churn, the skills system in England is confusing for young people, adults, and employers. Apprenticeship numbers have plummeted. Skills shortages are widespread. Young people have been left without the opportunities they need. The result is an economy without the necessary skills, nor any plan for the skills needs of the future. Labour will address this by bringing forward a comprehensive strategy for post‐16 education. And we will guarantee training, an apprenticeship, or help to find work for all 18- to 21-year-olds.

We will establish Skills England to bring together business, training providers and unions with national and local government to ensure we have the highly trained workforce needed to deliver Labour’s Industrial Strategy. Skills England will formally work with the Migration Advisory Committee to make sure training in England accounts for the overall needs of the labour market. And we are committed to devolving adult skills funding to Combined Authorities, empowering local leaders to have greater control of skills development in their areas, alongside a greater role in supporting people into work. Skills England will co-ordinate between local areas to ensure everyone can access all the opportunities available.

Labour will transform Further Education colleges into specialist Technical Excellence Colleges. These colleges will work with businesses, trade unions, and local government to provide young people with better job opportunities and the highly trained workforce that local economies need.

Labour will also reform the Conservatives’ broken Apprenticeships Levy. The current rigid rules ignore vital skills and training needed to access apprenticeships. Labour will create a flexible Growth and Skills Levy, with Skills England consulting on eligible courses to ensure qualifications offer value for money.

Labour will continue to support the aspiration of every person who meets the requirements and wants to go to university.

We recognise that UK higher education creates opportunity, is a world-leading sector in our economy, and supports local communities. To better integrate further and higher education, and ensure high-quality teaching, Labour’s post-16 skills strategy will set out the role for different providers, and how students can move between institutions, as well as strengthening regulation. We will act to improve access to universities and raise teaching standards.

The current higher education funding settlement does not work for the taxpayer, universities, staff, or students. Labour will act to create a secure future for higher education and the opportunities it creates across the UK. We will work with universities to deliver for students and our economy.

Access to arts, music and sport

With Labour, the arts and music will no longer be the preserve of a privileged few. Culture is an essential part of supporting children and young people to develop creativity and find their voice. There is huge potential for growth in the creative industries that benefit every corner of the UK.

Labour will implement our creative industries sector plan as part of our Industrial Strategy, creating good jobs and accelerating growth in film, music, gaming, and other creative sectors. We will work constructively with the BBC and our other public service broadcasters so they continue to inform, educate and entertain people, and support the creative economy by commissioning distinctively British content.

Labour will support children to study a creative or vocational subject until they are 16, and ensure accountability measures reflect this. We will get more children active by protecting time for physical education, and supporting the role grassroots clubs play in expanding access to sport.

Labour will improve access to cultural assets by requiring publicly funded national museums and galleries to increase the loans they make from their collections to communities across the country. We will also launch a new National Music Education Network – a one-stop shop with information on courses and classes for parents, teachers and children. Access to music, drama and sport has become difficult and expensive because of ticket touting. Labour will put fans back at the heart of events by introducing new consumer protections on ticket resales.

From the Men’s UEFA European Football Championship to the ICC Women’s T20 World Cup to the Invictus Games, Labour will deliver international events with pride and seek new opportunities where we can, creating a legacy to inspire the next generation of talent while promoting exercise and healthy living.

Labour is committed to making Britain the best place in the world to be a football fan. We will reform football governance to protect football clubs across our communities and to give fans a greater say in the way they are run. We will introduce a Football Governance Bill, which will establish an independent regulator to ensure financial sustainability of football clubs in England. We will never allow a closed league of select clubs to be siphoned off from the English football pyramid.
“I welcome Labour’s proposals set out by Keir Starmer to broaden opportunity and make sure all young people have access to the arts. Opening up access to creativity in our schools is critical, not just so that our children have a better chance at a career in the arts, but because access is what will fuel growth in the creative industries — one of the most important sectors for the future of the economy — creating good jobs in all corners of the country.”

– Imelda Staunton CBE, Actor

Respect and equality for all

Everyone in this country deserves a government that matches their ambition. Labour will ensure no matter whatever your background, you can thrive, and therefore we will enact the socio-economic duty in the Equality Act 2010.

Women’s equality will be at the heart of our missions. Our plan to Make Work Pay will transform the lives of working women, including by strengthening rights to equal pay and protections from maternity and menopause discrimination and sexual harassment. And Labour will take action to reduce the gender pay gap, building on the legacy of Barbara Castle’s Equal Pay Act.

Labour will introduce a landmark Race Equality Act, to enshrine in law the full right to equal pay for Black, Asian, and other ethnic minority people, strengthen protections against dual discrimination and root out other racial inequalities. Labour will also reverse the Conservatives’ decision to downgrade the monitoring of antisemitic and Islamophobic hate.

Labour is committed to championing the rights of disabled people and to the principle of working with them, so that their views and voices will be at the heart of all we do. We will introduce the full right to equal pay for disabled people. Building on gender pay gap reporting, we will introduce disability and ethnicity pay gap reporting for large employers. We will support disabled people to work by improving employment support and access to reasonable adjustments. We will also tackle the Access to Work backlog and make sure people can try out a job without fear of an immediate benefit reassessment if it does not work out.

Delivering opportunities for all means that everyone should be treated with respect and dignity. Labour will protect LGBT+ and disabled people by making all existing strands of hate crime an aggravated offence.

So-called conversion therapy is abuse – there is no other word for it – so Labour will finally deliver a full trans-inclusive ban on conversion practices, while protecting the freedom for people to explore their sexual orientation and gender identity.

We will also modernise, simplify, and reform the intrusive and outdated gender recognition law to a new process. We will remove indignities for trans people who deserve recognition and acceptance; whilst retaining the need for a diagnosis of gender dysphoria from a specialist doctor, enabling access to the healthcare pathway.

Labour is proud of our Equality Act and the rights and protections it affords women; we will continue to support the implementation of its single-sex exceptions.

Labour will stop the chaos, end the failure and division of the last 14 years, and turn the page to ensure everyone can thrive.


Help deliver change to Britain.

Build an NHS fit for the future

How Labour will build an NHS fit for the future:

Cut NHS waiting times with 40,000 more appointments every week
Double the number of cancer scanners
A new Dentistry Rescue Plan
8,500 additional mental health staff
Return of the family doctor

The 1945 Labour government founded our National Health Service on principles that have stood the test of time:

The best health services should be available, free for all. Money should no longer be the passport to the best treatment. People should get the best that modern science can offer.

For decades the NHS has served us well, with those values enduring. These are the principles which will underpin the next Labour government’s plan to reform the NHS.

But as we look at the NHS now, it is clearly broken – and the Conservatives broke it. Whilst the Covid-19 pandemic placed the NHS under unprecedented stress, the reality is waiting lists were at record highs even before it struck. Rather than healthcare being ‘free for all’, we now find ourselves with a de facto two-tier system – with working people regularly forced to scrape together the means to go private. Meanwhile, over the past 14 years, the ‘winter crisis’ cycle has become part of the national calendar. Every year, a new crisis is declared. Then, every year, the Conservatives reach for a sticking plaster patch-up to get through the winter, without ever addressing the root cause.

This is a situation Labour is familiar with: we have saved the NHS before, and the next Labour Government will do so again. With Labour, it will always be publicly owned and publicly funded. But our ambition goes beyond returning the NHS to what it was. Labour’s mission is to build an NHS fit for the future. Investment alone won’t be enough to tackle the problems facing the NHS; it must go hand in hand with fundamental reform.

We must change the NHS so that it becomes not just a sickness service, but able to prevent ill heath in the first place. It must also reflect the change in the nature of disease, with a greater focus on the management of chronic, long-term conditions. And we will deliver a renewed drive to tackle the biggest killers; cutting the lives lost to cancer, cardiovascular disease and suicide, while ensuring people live well for longer.

Labour’s reforms will shift our NHS away from a model geared towards late diagnosis and treatment, to a model where more services are delivered in local communities. We will harness the power of technologies like AI to transform the speed and accuracy of diagnostic services, saving potentially thousands of lives. And we will embed a greater focus on prevention throughout the entire healthcare system and supporting services. As we knew in 1945, much avoidable ill health can be prevented.

The factor that is markedly different from the past decades is our understanding of mental health. Across society, mental health has stepped out of the shadows, yet it is difficult to argue the NHS has kept up. Indeed, Britain is currently suffering from a mental health epidemic that is paralysing lives, particularly those of children and young people. This is a tragedy – arguably nothing says more about the state of a nation than the wellbeing of its children. So right at the core of our mission will be a bold new ambition to raise the healthiest generation of children in our history. And, as a crucial part of that, we will reform the NHS to ensure we give mental health the same attention and focus as physical health.

Get the NHS back on its feet

We should all be able to trust that the NHS will be there for us when we need it, whether it is a GP appointment, an ambulance, or help at A&E. Labour’s immediate priority on health will be to get a grip on the record waiting list. We will return to meeting NHS performance standards. That means patients should expect to wait no longer than 18 weeks from referral for consultant-led treatment of non-urgent health conditions. This standard was achieved with the last Labour government and will be again under the next.

As a first step, in England we will deliver an extra two million NHS operations, scans, and appointments every year; that is 40,000 more appointments every week. We will do this by incentivising staff to carry out additional appointments out of hours. Labour will pool resources across neighbouring hospitals to introduce shared waiting lists to allow patients to be treated quicker. Recognising the urgent need to bring down waiting lists, Labour will use spare capacity in the independent sector to ensure patients are diagnosed and treated more quickly.

Getting the NHS back to working for patients means ending the workforce crisis across both health and social care. When one in seven people in hospital do not need to be there, joint working is essential. Labour will ensure the publication of regular, independent workforce planning, across health and social care. We will deliver the NHS long-term workforce plan to train the staff we need to get patients seen on time.

Too many patients have seen their treatment affected by strikes. Labour will reset relations with NHS staff, moving away from the Conservatives’ failed approach.

Modernising the NHS

A system reliant on pagers and fax machines is not fit for this decade let alone the next. Too many cancer deaths could have been prevented with earlier diagnosis. The NHS has fewer diagnostic scanners per person than other countries, with many ageing machines operating for long after they should. State of the art scanners with embedded AI are faster and more effective at finding smaller tumours, saving lives. Therefore, Labour will introduce a new ‘Fit For the Future’ fund to double the number of CT and MRI scanners, allowing the NHS to catch cancer and other conditions earlier, saving lives.

It is also clear that NHS estates are in a state of disrepair after years of neglect. Labour is therefore committed to delivering the New Hospitals Programme.

The revolution taking place in data and life sciences has the potential to transform our nation’s healthcare. The Covid-19 pandemic showed how a strong mission-driven industrial strategy, involving government partnering with industry and academia, could turn the tide on a pandemic. This is the approach we will take in government. As part of Labour’s life sciences plan, we will develop an NHS innovation and adoption strategy in England. This will include a plan for procurement, giving a clearer route to get products into the NHS coupled with reformed incentive structures to drive innovation and faster regulatory approval for new technology and medicines.

Drawing on the strength of our National Health Service, Labour will also maximise our potential to lead the world in clinical trials. This means making the process more efficient and accessible, by speeding up recruitment and giving more people a chance to participate through the NHS app. This will mean putting Britain at the forefront of transforming treatment for dementia.

Power to the patients

At the heart of every medical decision must be patients and their families. Too many are not treated with the respect they deserve or given the information they need to adequately access services and navigate the system.

Labour will therefore transform the NHS app, putting patients in control of their own health to better manage their medicine, appointments, and health needs. This will include giving performance information on local services, and notifications of vaccinations and health checks. Patients will be able to see the medical guidelines for the treatment they should get, to hold health services to account and understand what their choices are.

Ensuring patient safety

Childbirth should not be something women fear or look back on with trauma. Labour will ensure that trusts failing on maternity care are robustly supported into rapid improvement. We will train thousands more midwives as part of the NHS Workforce Plan and set an explicit target to close the Black and Asian maternal mortality gap.

Labour will digitise the Red Book record of children’s health, improving support for new families. We will also enable vaccinations for babies and children as part of health visits.

So much of the treatment in the NHS is dependent on the effective administration of services. Managers need support and accountability. Labour will implement professional standards and regulate NHS managers, ensuring those who commit serious misconduct can never do so again. And we will establish a Royal College of Clinical Leadership to champion the voice of clinicians.

We will work to implement the expert recommendations of the Cass Review to ensure that young people presenting to the NHS with gender dysphoria are receiving appropriate and high-quality care.

Healthcare closer to home

The National Health Service needs to move to a Neighbourhood Health Service, with more care delivered in local communities to spot problems earlier. To achieve this, we must over time shift resources to primary care and community services.

GPs are the front door to the health service for most people. Excellent primary care is the key to earlier diagnosis, but too often it is not possible to get an appointment, so Labour will reform the system. We will train thousands more GPs, guarantee a face-to-face appointment for all those who want one and deliver a modern appointment booking system to end the 8am scramble. We will bring back the family doctor by incentivising GPs to see the same patient, so ongoing or complex conditions are dealt with effectively.

Labour will also take the pressure off GP surgeries, by improving access to services and treatment through new routes. We will create a Community Pharmacist Prescribing Service, granting more pharmacists independent prescribing rights where clinically appropriate. We will allow other professionals, such as opticians, to make direct referrals to specialist services or tests, as well as expanding self-referral routes where appropriate.

The principle of integrating health and care services will improve the treatment patients receive. We know that more of this care needs to happen outside hospitals. Therefore, we will trial Neighbourhood Health Centres, by bringing together existing services such as family doctors, district nurses, care workers, physiotherapists, palliative care, and mental health specialists under one roof.

Dentistry Rescue Plan

Getting an NHS dentist is increasingly a lottery and the consequences are dire. The most common reason children aged five to nine are admitted to hospital is to have rotting teeth removed. Labour will tackle the immediate crisis with a rescue plan to provide 700,000 more urgent dental appointments and recruit new dentists to areas that need them most. To rebuild dentistry for the long term, Labour will reform the dental contract, with a shift to focusing on prevention and the retention of NHS dentists. We will also introduce a supervised tooth-brushing scheme for 3- to 5-year-olds, targeting the areas of highest need.

Social care reform

Labour is committed to ensuring everyone lives an independent, prosperous life. Social care is vital to achieving this, but hundreds of thousands of people suffer without the care they need for a dignified life. The sector needs deep reform: there are inconsistent standards, chronic staff shortages, and people are not always treated with the care, dignity and respect they deserve.

Labour will undertake a programme of reform to create a National Care Service, underpinned by national standards, delivering consistency of care across the country. Services will be locally delivered, with a principle of ‘home first’ that supports people to live independently for as long as possible. Our new standards will ensure high-quality care and ongoing sustainability, and ensure providers behave responsibly. Labour will develop local partnership working between the NHS and social care on hospital discharge.

We will enhance partnership working across employers, workers, trade unions and government and establish a Fair Pay Agreement in adult social care. This sector collective agreement will set fair pay, terms and conditions, along with training standards. Labour will consult widely on the design of this agreement, before beginning the process and learn from countries where they operate successfully.

Labour is committed to ensuring families have the support they need. We will guarantee the rights of those in residential care to be able to see their families. As part of the efforts to move healthcare into local communities and professionalise the workforce, we will task regulators with assessing the role social care workers can play in basic health treatment and monitoring.

Alongside these changes, we will build consensus for the longer-term reform needed to create a sustainable National Care Service. We will explore how we best manage and support an ageing population; how integration with the NHS can be secured; how to best support working age disabled adults; and how to move to a more preventative system.

Improving mental health

The NHS has struggled to keep up with greater awareness of the challenges of mental health. Waiting lists for those referred for support are too high, and shamefully so for young people.

Labour will bring waiting times down and intervene earlier. We will recruit an additional 8,500 new staff to treat children and adults through our first term. As part of our mission to reduce the lives lost to suicide, these new staff will be specially trained to support people at risk. Labour’s new Young Futures hubs will provide open access mental health services for children and young people in every community.

Mental health legislation is also woefully out of date. The treatment of people with autism and learning difficulties is a disgrace. The operation of the Mental Health Act discriminates against Black people who are much more likely to be detained than others. Labour will modernise legislation to give patients greater choice, autonomy, enhanced rights and support, and ensure everyone is treated with dignity and respect throughout treatment.

Action on public health

Prevention will always be better, and cheaper, than a cure. So, we must take preventative public health measures to tackle the biggest killers and support people to live longer, healthier lives.

That starts with smoking. Labour will ensure the next generation can never legally buy cigarettes and ensure all hospitals integrate ‘opt-out’ smoking cessation interventions into routine care. Labour will ban vapes from being branded and advertised to appeal to children to stop the next generation from becoming hooked on nicotine.

We face a childhood obesity crisis. So, Labour is committed to banning advertising junk food to children along with the sale of high-caffeine energy drinks to under-16s.

Children and young people face significant harm online, with inappropriate content too easily available at their fingertips on a smartphone. We have seen an increase in extreme misogynistic content online driving a culture of violence against women. Labour will build on the Online Safety Act, bringing forward provisions as quickly as possible, and explore further measures to keep everyone safe online, particularly when using social media. We will also give coroners more powers to access information held by technology companies after a child’s death.

Labour is committed to reducing gambling-related harm. Recognising the evolution of the gambling landscape since 2005, Labour will reform gambling regulation, strengthening protections. We will continue to work with the industry on how to ensure responsible gambling.

“I’ve worked in the NHS for a long time and I remember how Labour, the party who created the NHS, transformed it to be the best-performing health system in the world. It is heartbreaking to see its decline over the last 14 years. It will be difficult but I believe that, under Keir Starmer, Labour’s plans, short and long term, will once again restore the NHS to deliver top-class health care for the people of this nation, reducing waiting lists and times and transforming it to be fit for the future.”

– Dame Julie Moore, Former CEO of Birmingham NHS Trust

Reducing health inequalities

The UK has stark health inequalities. It cannot be right that life expectancy varies so widely across and within communities. As part of our health mission, Labour will tackle the social determinants of health, halving the gap in healthy life expectancy between the richest and poorest regions in England. Never again will women’s health be neglected. Labour will prioritise women’s health as we reform the NHS.

We are currently on the cusp of eradicating new cases of HIV. Labour will commission a new HIV action plan in England, in pursuit of ending HIV cases by 2030.

Labour will stop the chaos in our health and care services, turn the page, and reform them in line with the principles of the NHS that Labour founded.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Serving the country

How Labour will serve Britain:

A new Ethics and Integrity Commission
Modernise the House of Commons
Immediate reform of the House of Lords
A reset between Westminster and Holyrood, Cardiff Bay, and Stormont  
Votes at 16

Over the last 14 years, trust in politics has been shattered. Partying in Downing Street whilst the whole country sacrificed their freedom. Handing lucrative Covid contracts to friends and donors. Failing to expel MPs caught breaking the rules. The behaviour of the Conservatives has understandably led to a widespread belief that many politicians are in it for themselves. As a result, there is now a crisis of confidence in our political system’s ability to deliver any change.

This is not limited to Westminster – in Scotland, the Scottish National Party has also failed to uphold the standards expected in public life. The scandals may be different, but the SNP has also sought to protect its own and failed to address the behaviour of its MPs and MSPs, from sexual harassment scandals to accusations of financial mismanagement and defending the inappropriate use of public expenses. The people of Scotland also deserve better from their representatives.

It is not just sleaze and scandal that have eroded trust. Just as corrosive has been the inability of politicians to keep promises made to the British people. Over the last 14 years, the vast chasm between Conservative slogans and reality has shown a contempt for democracy. From claiming “we’re all in it together” while decimating public services, to the empty promises to “level up”, gimmicks and gestures have shamefully replaced the hard graft of governing.

In contrast, Labour has been transformed from a party of protest to one that always puts the interests of the country first. Now we are determined to do the same with our politics, returning government to the service of working people. This will require a reset in our public life; a clean-up that ensures the highest standards of integrity and honesty. We will make sure MPs focus on serving their constituents. We will deepen our democracy by reforming Parliament and devolving power to communities. And rather than stoking division – as do both the Conservatives and the SNP – we will ensure there is respect and collaboration across the different governments that make up the United Kingdom.

Setting the highest of standards in public life is not just about better behaviour or decision-making, though it will improve both. It is also central to restoring trust between the public and politics. After 14 years of chaos, division and disrespect, the British people are understandably cynical about appeals to come together in the national interest. But the challenges we face demand nothing less – it is the lifeblood of national renewal. This plan recognises that politics must make the first move in repairing that bond.
Restoring public service in Westminster

Labour will restore confidence in government and ensure ministers are held to the highest standards. We will establish a new independent Ethics and Integrity Commission, with its own independent Chair, to ensure probity in government.

Labour will review and update post-government employment rules to end flagrant abuses seen under the Conservatives. This includes enforcing restrictions on ministers lobbying for the companies they used to regulate, with meaningful sanctions for breaching the rules. We will give the Independent Adviser on Ministerial Interests the powers to start investigations into misconduct and ensure they have access to the evidence they need.

Most MPs work hard to serve their constituents but can be hamstrung by arcane procedures and outdated working practices. Labour will establish a new Modernisation Committee tasked with reforming House of Commons procedures, driving up standards, and improving working practices. The absence of rules on second jobs also means some constituents end up with MPs who spend more time on their second job, or lobbying for outside interests, than on representing them. Therefore, as an initial step, Labour will support an immediate ban on MPs from taking up paid advisory or consultancy roles. We will task the Modernisation Committee to take forward urgent work on the restrictions that need to be put in place to prevent MPs from taking up roles that stop them serving their constituents and the country.

Constitutional reform

Although Labour recognises the good work of many peers who scrutinise the government and improve the quality of legislation passed in Parliament, reform is long over-due and essential. Too many peers do not play a proper role in our democracy. Hereditary peers remain indefensible. And because appointments are for life, the second chamber of Parliament has become too big.

The next Labour government will therefore bring about an immediate modernisation, by introducing legislation to remove the right of hereditary peers to sit and vote in the House of Lords. Labour will also introduce a mandatory retirement age. At the end of the Parliament in which a member reaches 80 years of age, they will be required to retire from the House of Lords.

Labour will ensure all peers meet the high standards the public expect of them, and we will introduce a new participation requirement as well as strengthening the circumstances in which disgraced members can be removed. We will reform the appointments process to ensure the quality of new appointments and will seek to improve the national and regional balance of the second chamber.

Whilst this action to modernise the House of Lords will be an improvement, Labour is committed to replacing the House of Lords with an alternative second chamber that is more representative of the regions and nations. Labour will consult on proposals, seeking the input of the British public on how politics can best serve them.

Upholding democracy

Labour is committed to strengthening our democracy and upholding the integrity of elections. Rather than encouraging full participation in our democracy, the Conservatives have brought in partisan changes that make it harder to vote, whilst doing nothing to strengthen protections against foreign interference.

To encourage participation in our democracy, Labour will improve voter registration and address the inconsistencies in voter ID rules that prevent legitimate voters from voting. For example, in the case of HM Armed Forces Veteran Cards. We will increase the engagement of young people in our vibrant democracy, by giving 16- and 17-year-olds the right to vote in all elections. And we will protect democracy by strengthening the rules around donations to political parties.

Greater collaboration and respect across the country

As part of Labour’s plans to clean up politics and return it to the service of working people, we will reset the UK Government’s relationship with devolved governments in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.

The Conservatives weakened our country by disrespecting the legitimate role of devolved governments and parliaments. We will ensure members of devolved legislatures have the same free speech protections enjoyed by MPs at Westminster, so elected representatives can hold power to account.

Labour will ensure the structures and institutions of intergovernmental working improve relationships and collaboration on policy. Labour will strengthen the Sewel Convention by setting out a new memorandum of understanding outlining how the nations will work together for the common good.

Labour will renew opportunities for the Prime Minister and Heads of Devolved Government to collaborate with each other. As recommended in the Report of the Commission on the UK’s future, we will establish a new Council of the Nations and Regions. This will bring together the Prime Minister, the First Ministers of Scotland and Wales, the First and deputy First Minister of Northern Ireland, and the Mayors of Combined Authorities.

The next Labour government will also ensure that UK-wide bodies are more representative of our nations and regions. UK trade negotiators will work with devolved governments to promote our fantastic businesses and services internationally. Labour will restore decision-making over the allocation of structural funds to the representatives of Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. The planned investments in public services outlined in this manifesto by a UK government will result in additional funding for Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.

Scottish devolution and the Scotland office

The people of Scotland deserve governments that are focused on delivering for them. Labour does not support independence or another referendum, but we know that after 14 years of the Conservatives, the people of Scotland need change. Labour will take a different approach in Scotland: we will protect and respect devolution and reset relations between governments.

Labour will strengthen Scottish democracy and devolution, championing Scotland at home and abroad. We will ensure the devolution settlement for Scotland enables collaboration on Labour’s national missions for government. We will maintain the arrangements in the new Scottish fiscal framework.

A UK Labour government will have a more collaborative approach to the Scottish Government on their international engagement. We recognise that within devolved competencies, the Scottish Government has an important role to play. In respect to wholly devolved issues, Labour will support the Scottish Government to partner with international bodies where relevant and appropriate, for example to collaborate on global health initiatives. The UK Government will retain full responsibility over foreign policy.

The Scotland Office will maximise Scotland’s influence, and with Labour it will once again become an advocate for Scotland, both at home and abroad. The Scotland Office will ensure the voice of Scotland is properly heard on issues under the competence of the UK Government. Scotland has an enviable international reputation. Its culture, products and services are internationally renowned – from whisky and salmon to computer game development, bioscience and financial services. Labour will champion ‘Brand Scotland’ across the world through the Scotland Office, and our diplomatic and trade networks.

Welsh devolution and the Wales office

Wales has been failed by a chaotic and divisive Conservative Government that does not understand the ambitions of the Welsh people and refuses to work with the Welsh Government to achieve them. Labour will serve Wales with a plan that matches those ambitions.

We will strengthen the relationship between the governments in Westminster and Cardiff Bay. The two governments will work collaboratively to deliver Labour’s national missions. Labour recognises that the Welsh Fiscal Framework is out of date. We are committed to working in partnership with the Welsh Government to ensure the framework delivers value for money with two Labour governments committed to fiscal responsibility.

Labour recognises the value of integrated public services, which are more efficient and create better outcomes. As part of the strategic review into probation, we will explore the devolution of services to enable them to be more locally responsive. We will work with the Welsh Labour Government to consider devolution of youth justice. In line with our commitment to devolve employment support in England, Labour will devolve employment support funding to the Welsh Government.

Welsh culture, products and services are renowned around the world – from the thriving tourism sector and highest-quality steel to Welsh Lamb and semi-conductors. Labour will harness the UK’s diplomatic and trade networks, working with the Welsh Government to champion Wales across the world.

With Labour, the Wales Office will once again become an advocate for Wales at home and abroad and facilitate closer collaboration between our governments. The Wales Office will ensure on issues under the competence of the UK government the voice of Wales is properly heard.

Northern Ireland

Northern Ireland needs stability and long-term certainty after the challenges of recent years. Labour will work with the Executive and Assembly to improve public services and generate economic growth, and with all political parties and communities to ensure the stability of devolved government.

Labour is committed to implementing the Windsor Framework in good faith and protecting the UK internal market. Northern Ireland’s economy has enormous strengths – with a highly skilled workforce, strong services, manufacturing and life sciences sectors, and great opportunities for inward investment. A Labour government will champion Northern Ireland around the world and work with the Executive to encourage more businesses to invest in Northern Ireland’s future.

Labour is committed to taking forward discussions with the Executive about a fiscal framework for Northern Ireland.

The Good Friday Agreement, and the peace and prosperity it has brought to Northern Ireland, is one of the proudest achievements of the last Labour government. As a guarantor of the Good Friday Agreement, a Labour government will uphold both the letter and the spirit of the Agreement, along with the principle of consent on which it rests. We will work with the Irish Government to strengthen the relationship between our two countries.

The Legacy Act denies justice to the families and victims of the Troubles. Labour will repeal and replace it, by returning to the principles of the Stormont House Agreement, and seeking support from all communities in Northern Ireland.

Labour will end the chaos of sleaze and division, turn the page, and reset politics to put it back in the service of working people.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Labour plan for small businesses will pull up the shutters for Britain’s entrepreneurs
Jun 8, 2024
A Labour government would pull up the shutters for small businesses after 14 years of decline under the Conservatives.

Our plan for small business is fully-funded and fully-costed, and includes plans to introduce new legislation and regulatory reforms designed to significantly benefit small businesses.

Labour’s plan has the backing of business leaders including Dragon’s Den investors Deborah Meaden and Theo Paphitis as well as small business owners up and down the country.

Labour’s plan for small business
Guarantee small businesses access to banking services on their high street, including safely depositing cash, by changing regulations to accelerate the rollout of banking hubs.
⁠Replace the business rates system, with a new system that will level the playing field between the high street and online giants.
⁠Revitalise Britain’s high streets by tackling anti-social behaviour through the introduction of new town centre police patrols
Make the UK the best place to start-up and scale-up by unlocking the supply of finance for businesses looking to grow.
Stamp out late payment of invoices to small businesses, requiring large businesses to better report on their payment practices to expose late payers.
Open up competition to public contracts, giving small businesses the fairer chance they deserve to compete in tenders by requiring at least one SME to be shortlisted when smaller contracts go to tender.
Boost small business exports by publishing a trade strategy and delivering clear advice to get new businesses exporting
Give a new direction for skills and addressing skills shortages by creating Skills England and working with local industry to ensure local people have the skills they want including new Technical Excellence Colleges.
Make Britain a Clean Energy Superpower and cutting energy bills for small business and creating thousands of opportunities from tradespeople.
The Labour Party knows the value of small businesses; they are not just the lifeblood of our communities but essential to our economic success. 

That is why last year, we launched The Beating Heart of Our Economy, an ambitious plan to support small businesses.

Britain reconnected

How Labour will reconnect Britain:

Unshakeable commitment to NATO and our nuclear deterrent
Standing up for our armed forces and veterans
New trade agreements
Britain leading a Clean Power Alliance
Modernise international development

With Labour, Britain will once again be strong on the world stage, confident in the pursuit of our national interest, and progressive but realistic about the challenges we face. We will reconnect with allies and forge new partnerships to deliver security and prosperity at home and abroad.

Over the last 14 years, the world has grown more volatile and insecure. War has returned to Europe for the first time in a generation, there is devastating violence in the Middle East, rapid technological change and the climate crisis are fuelling geopolitical tensions, and malign actors are seeking to divide us.

This darkening global landscape demands a strong and connected Britain.

Instead, chaotic Conservative foreign policy has weakened our alliances, squandered our climate leadership – a huge diplomatic opportunity – and undermined our reputation as upholders of international law. At home, Conservative attacks on our globally respected institutions – universities, courts and the BBC – have undermined our soft power, traditionally a source of great strength, and diminished our influence.

This failure on the international stage has cost the British people. We are less secure, with families exposed to high energy bills and food prices as a result.

Labour will turn the page and reverse this, reinvigorating alliances and forging new partnerships. Our commitment to NATO as the cornerstone of European and global security is unshakeable. We will be confident in our status outside of the EU, but a leading nation in Europe once again, with an improved and ambitious relationship with our European partners. We will once again be a good partner for international development, and a defender of the international rule of law. And we will return to the forefront of climate action by creating the green jobs of the future at home and driving forward the energy transition on the global stage.

Britain will be a reliable partner, a dependable ally, and a good neighbour. An optimistic country at the start of an era of renewal.

Rebuilding relationships

Britain is always stronger when we work with others. The United States is an indispensable ally. Our special relationship is crucial for security and prosperity, and transcends whatever political parties and individuals are in office. We will continue to work with the United States on the basis of our shared values and common interests including on economic co-operation, defence and intelligence.

With Labour, Britain will stay outside of the EU. But to seize the opportunities ahead, we must make Brexit work. We will reset the relationship and seek to deepen ties with our European friends, neighbours and allies. That does not mean reopening the divisions of the past. There will be no return to the single market, the customs union, or freedom of movement.

Instead, Labour will work to improve the UK’s trade and investment relationship with the EU, by tearing down unnecessary barriers to trade. We will seek to negotiate a veterinary agreement to prevent unnecessary border checks and help tackle the cost of food; will help our touring artists; and secure a mutual recognition agreement for professional qualifications to help open up markets for UK service exporters.

Labour will seek an ambitious new UK-EU security pact to strengthen co-operation on the threats we face. We will rebuild relationships with key European allies, including France and Germany, through increased defence and security co-operation. We will seek new bilateral agreements and closer working with Joint Expeditionary Force partners. This will strengthen NATO and keep Britain safe.

Multilateral institutions remain indispensable, but they are struggling under the strain of new global challenges. Labour will work with allies to build, strengthen and reform these institutions. We will use the UK’s unique position in NATO, the UN, G7, G20 and the Commonwealth to address the threats we face, and to uphold human rights and international law. Labour values international law because of the security it brings. Britain will unequivocally remain a member of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Defending the UK’s security

Labour’s first duty in government will be to keep our country safe. We will launch a Strategic Defence Review to assess the threats we face and the capabilities needed to address them. At the heart of our security are the men and women who serve and risk their lives for this country. We will strengthen support for our Armed Forces communities by putting the Armed Forces Covenant fully into law and establishing an independent Armed Forces Commissioner to improve service life. Labour will ensure veterans have access to the mental health, employment, and housing support and in other areas they need. We will also scrap visa fees for non-UK veterans who have served for four or more years and their dependents.

Strengthening Britain’s security requires a long-term partnership with our domestic defence industry. Labour will bring forward a defence industrial strategy aligning our security and economic priorities. We will ensure a strong defence sector and resilient supply chains, including steel, across the whole of the UK. We will establish long-term partnerships between business and government, promote innovation, and improve resilience. We will prioritise UK businesses for defence investment and will reform procurement to reduce waste. Labour will support industry to benefit from export opportunities, in line with a robust arms export regime committed to upholding international law.

Strengthening our defences also requires stronger leadership, clearer accountability, faster delivery, less waste, and better value for money. Labour will establish a fully functioning military strategic headquarters and a national armaments director to create a strong defence centre capable of leading Britain in meeting the increasing threats we face.

With Labour, the UK’s military, financial, diplomatic and political support for Ukraine will remain steadfast. Labour will support efforts to hold Putin’s Russia to account for its illegal war, backing calls for a Special Tribunal for the Crime of Aggression. We will work with our allies to enable the seizure and repurposing of frozen Russian state assets to support Ukraine. And we will play a leading role in providing Ukraine with a clear path to NATO membership.

Labour will also work with our allies and international financial centres to tackle corruption and money laundering, including in Britain, Crown Dependencies, and in British Overseas Territories.

Labour is fully committed to AUKUS, the trilateral security partnership with Australia and the United States. We will ensure it delivers its full economic as well as security potential, increasing jobs and investment in communities across the UK.

After 14 years of damaging Conservative inconsistency over China, Labour will bring a long-term and strategic approach to managing our relations. We will co-operate where we can, compete where we need to, and challenge where we must. We will improve the UK’s capability to understand and respond to the challenges and opportunities China poses through an audit of our bilateral relationship. We will always act in our interests and defend our sovereignty and our democratic values. We will stand with and support members of the Hong Kong community who have relocated to the UK.

Defending our security also means protecting the British Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies, including the Falklands and Gibraltar. Labour will always defend their sovereignty and right to self-determination.

Championing UK prosperity

Labour’s first mission in government will be to grow our economy. This will be at the heart of everything we do, including our foreign policy. We will use our diplomatic network to attract foreign direct investment into the UK, expand markets for British exporters, and shape emerging regulatory frameworks.

Britain is a proud trading nation and flourishing international business is a vital part of our plan for growth. Openness to trade allows our firms to grow and delivers greater choice and value for consumers. Rather than prioritising insubstantial agreements which do not bring meaningful benefits to the UK, Labour will seek targeted trade agreements aligned with our industrial strategy and economic strengths, to bring prosperity to communities across England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.

We will publish a trade strategy and use every lever available to get UK business the access it needs to international markets. This will promote the highest standards when it comes to food production. As well as striking new free trade agreements, Labour will seek to negotiate standalone sector deals, such as digital, or mutual recognition agreements, to promote our services exports.

We will lead international discussions to modernise trade rules and agreements so they work for Britain, promoting deeper trade and co-operation including through the World Trade Organisation and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership. Labour supports implementation of the OECD global minimum rate of corporate taxation and backs international efforts to make sure multinational tech companies pay their fair share of tax.

Labour will build and strengthen modern partnerships with allies and regional powers. We will seek a new strategic partnership with India, including a free trade agreement, as well as deepening co-operation in areas like security, education, technology and climate change. We will deepen our co-operation with partners across the Gulf on regional security, energy and trade and investment.

Recognising the growing political and economic importance of African countries, we will deliver a new approach to the continent to foster opportunities for mutual long-term benefit.

Climate leadership

We cannot address the urgency of the climate and nature crisis without co-ordinated global action. A failure to act will cause environmental devastation, fuelling displacement, conflict and famine. By being climate leaders at home, including meeting our agreed targets, Labour will restore the strong global leadership needed to tackle the climate crisis.

International allies and competitors have already recognised the opportunities and are racing ahead, investing in new technology and creating the jobs of the future. Under the Conservatives, Britain has squandered our leadership, wasting the opportunity of our COP26 presidency to make historic progress. Labour will move faster by working together with our international partners, especially those at the forefront of the climate crisis, including Pakistan and Bangladesh, and the COP30 hosts, Brazil.

Labour will create a new Clean Power Alliance, bringing together a coalition of countries at the cutting edge of climate action. This will help to deliver lower energy bills while accelerating the energy transition and protecting and enhancing clean energy supply chains.

Strengthening diplomacy

Labour will strengthen Britain’s influence abroad, defending our national interests, promoting progressive values, and protecting UK nationals.

Our diplomatic leadership is bolstered by the soft power of our world-leading cultural institutions. Rather than running these institutions down, we will work across government to bring leading creative and cultural institutions together to increase the UK’s international clout. And we will work with our proud diaspora communities to enhance our cultural links across the world.

Long-term peace and security in the Middle East will be an immediate focus. Labour will continue to push for an immediate ceasefire, the release of all hostages, the upholding of international law, and a rapid increase of aid into Gaza. Palestinian statehood is the inalienable right of the Palestinian people. It is not in the gift of any neighbour and is also essential to the long-term security of Israel. We are committed to recognising a Palestinian state as a contribution to a renewed peace process which results in a two-state solution with a safe and secure Israel alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian state.

Labour will also strengthen support for British nationals abroad. We will introduce a new right to consular assistance in cases of human rights violations.

With previous Labour governments, Britain gained world-leading expertise in international development, with the aim of making the world a safer, more prosperous place. Under the Conservatives, this capacity has been degraded, and as a result Britain has lost influence.

Labour will turn the page to rebuild Britain’s reputation on international development with a new approach based on genuine respect and partnership with the global South to support our common interests.

To counter the growing influence of malign actors and boost efforts to combat threats like climate change, the UK’s development work must be closely aligned with our foreign policy aims, co-ordinated to tackle global poverty, instability, and the climate and nature crisis. Our mission statement will be ‘to create a world free from poverty on a liveable planet’ as a signal of our commitment to greater multilateral action, and our intention to lead on this agenda.

Regaining Britain’s global leadership on development is a key part of our plan to reconnect with our allies and partners. Labour will strengthen international development work within the Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office. We will renew expertise and focus, especially in priority areas such as supporting economic transformation, tackling unsustainable debt, empowering women and girls, supporting conflict prevention, and unlocking climate finance.

Labour is committed to restoring development spending at the level of 0.7 per cent of gross national income as soon as fiscal circumstances allow. We will deliver value for money for the British taxpayer by working closely with the Independent Commission for Aid Impact to apply the highest standards to our aid spend – bringing in robust measures of development effectiveness, transparency, and scrutiny.

Labour will end the chaotic approach to foreign affairs, turn the page and reconnect with our allies, to once again stand strong on the world stage.

Help deliver change to Britain.

Labour’s fiscal plan

Our fiscal rules are non-negotiable and will apply to every decision taken by a Labour government. This means that the current budget must move into balance, so that day-to-day costs are met by revenues and debt must be falling as a share of the economy by the fifth year of the forecast.

Costs for Labour’s additional public services spending are set out below. We have used the last year of the most recent Office for Budget Responsibility forecast (2028-29) which represents the highest annual cost of the policies. However, we will begin to put these policies in place from day one of a Labour government, moving as quickly as possible in a way that also ensures value for money for the taxpayer.

We have not allocated all additional revenue to potential spending. This is a prudent approach in line with our commitment to economic stability.

Policies not listed here will be funded from existing budgets or do not have a cost.

Labour Party Manifesto 2024: Our plan to change Britain
Jun 13, 2024

Labour’s manifesto for change is a plan to kickstart economic growth by reforming Britain’s economy and bring about a decade of renewal.

This manifesto is an ambitious programme driven by belief in our country and its potential for the future. It is the change the country needs.

Our plan for Britain is a fully costed, fully funded, credible plan to turn the country around after 14 years of the Conservatives. It contains a tax lock for working people – a pledge not to raise rates of income tax, national insurance or VAT.

It is proof of a changed Labour Party with Keir Starmer that will change Britain – if people vote for change in the general election on Thursday 4 July.

Labour’s plan to kickstart growth will:
Restore economic stability with tough new spending rules, allow businesses to plan, with a cap on corporation tax at 25%, and a new industrial strategy to give business long-term certainty for investment decisions.
Unleash investment with a new National Wealth Fund to invest in the industries for the future, and Great British Energy to accelerate the transition to Clean Power. Our plan will create 650,000 jobs in the industries of the future.
Reform our planning rules to build the railways, roads, labs and 1.5 million homes we need and develop a new 10-year infrastructure strategy.
Reform decision-making to shift power away from Westminster to turbo-charge the efforts of mayors across the country, with new powers over transport, skills, housing and planning, and employment support, along with new growth plans for towns across the country.
Reform our jobs market by getting people back into work with careers and job centre reform, a New Deal for Working people to make work pay, a new childcare offer to get people into work, and a plan to tackle our health and mental health challenges to get people back to work.
Reform the immigration and skills system to ensure Britain is developing home-grown skills with workforce plans to meet the needs of industries and the economy.
Introduce a modern industrial strategy, working in partnership with businesses and workers to grasp the opportunities of new technologies, with an AI sector plan, a new national data library to support cutting-edge research, 10-year budgets for key world innovation institutions, and planning reform to build the datacentres and infrastructure we need.
Labour’s manifesto is built around five national missions to end sticking plaster politics, end the chaos, turn the page and meet the long-term challenges the country faces. 

Labour’s first steps for change show how we will begin to achieve those missions, with plans to deliver economic stability, cut NHS waiting times, launch a new Border Security Command, set up Great British Energy, crackdown on antisocial behaviour and recruit 6,500 new teachers.

Keir Starmer launches ‘Change’ – Labour’s general election manifesto
Jun 13, 2024
Keir Starmer, Leader of the Labour Party, speaking at the Labour Party manifesto launch, Manchester

Thank you, thank you very much. Thank you, Ange, for your introduction, for everything that you’re doing, I think I’m taking your bus this afternoon. Thank you, Richard, for your words. Thank you, Daniel, for reminding us why we’re doing what we’re doing. 

Nathaniel, I’ve heard your story before, but every single time it gets to me and I’m sure gets to every single person that listens to what you say, and I’m humbled by your determination to make sure that things are better for those in the next generation. 

And Holly, that was fantastic. Holly is 18-years-old. Anybody who has stood on a stage like this knows how hard it is, for all of us to stand up here. That’s the first time Holly has done anything like this in her life. Fantastic, Holly. And taken together, isn’t this clear evidence of a changed Labour Party, and clear evidence of the change we need for our country. 

We gave up on being a party of protest five years ago. We want to be a party of power. That’s not in the script, but that is part of the change.

And Holly, can I also say at the start of this, that this party respects and will never forget the contribution that your generation made during the pandemic. Thank you so much.

And thank you all for coming to Manchester. Thank you for all the hard work that’s gone into this campaign so far, into this project. Four-and-a-half years of work changing our party to put it back in the service of working people.

And now – the next step, the most important step, changing Britain. Rebuilding our country. So that it too serves the interests of working people.  

And what a place to launch our plan to do so. The home of the Co-operative Group. An organisation that has long believed, as we do, that the pursuit of social justice and economic growth must go hand-in-hand.

A day where I am proud – in this place, in this city – to launch Labour’s general election manifesto. A manifesto for wealth creation. A plan to change Britain.

Because today we can turn the page. Today we can lay a new foundation of stability. And on that foundation we can start to rebuild Britain. A Britain renewed by an old argument – that we serve working people, as their ambition drives our country forward. 

Because there is so much potential in this country. So much possibility if we stand together as four nations, and back the ambition people have for their family and their community.

I see it everywhere I go. Potential held back. I spoke to Will, he’s a fireman in Milton Keynes. He works really hard. What he wants, his dream, is to own his own home. A roof over his head that he can call his own. As well as a firefighter, he’s got two other jobs, but he can’t afford a mortgage – his dream will not be realised. That’s the price he’s paying.

I went to Alder Hey Hospital, not far from here. It is a brilliant children’s hospital, absolutely brilliant. And the day I went in, I went to the ward where they were doing operations on 0 to 2-year-old children, heart operations. It’s incredible to just see what they do, the courage of the individuals in there. Heart surgery – the brilliance of the NHS staff. I found that totally humbling, completely uplifting. Until I found out that at Alder Hey Hospital, the commonest cause for admission for operations for 6-to-10-year olds is children going there to have their teeth taken out, because they are decaying. That is the price that they are paying. 

So just imagine, imagine if instead – a Labour Government gives Will and Daniel the affordable homes that they need. Imagine, if instead – a Labour Government tackles the rot of tooth decay. Imagine what those nurses and doctors could do – with a Labour Government on their side.
 

Now don’t get me wrong. These challenges don’t disappear overnight if Labour wins. We don’t have a magic wand. But what we do have – what this manifesto represents, is a credible long-term plan. A plan built on stable foundations, with clear first steps, tough spending rules that will keep taxes and inflation low. NHS waiting times cut – with 40,000 extra appointments every week. A Border Security Command to smash the criminal smuggling gangs. Great British Energy to cut bills in your home for good, more police in your town, cracking down on antisocial behaviour, and 6,500 new teachers in your school – giving your children the start in life that they deserve.

But also, a plan that is much more than a list of policies. A plan for change, for growth, for giving our children their future back.

A chance to refocus politics on the things that matter to your family. The era of sticking plaster politics, the chaos and division, replaced by a government back in the service of you and your family.

And make no mistake – that is the cause of this changed Labour Party and we have written that argument through every word of this manifesto, because it’s urgent.

Britain has lost its balance. It is too hard for working people to get on. Opportunity is not spread evenly enough and too many communities are not just locked out of the wealth that we create, they are disregarded as sources of dynamism in the first place. 

Ignored by the toxic idea that economic growth is something the few hand down to the many. Today, we turn the page on that, forever.

Because that idea is part of the story of the past 14 years, part of everything they put you through.

When they crashed the pound to give tax cuts to the richest 1%. When they decimated your public services because of a mess made by banks. When they failed to invest in clean British energy, we were exposed when Putin invaded Ukraine. 

That idea was there, a Tory inability to face the future, rather than change, reform and strengthen government, so that it can intervene, in partnership with business, to give you and your family stability in this insecure world.

It doesn’t matter how many new policies the Tories throw at the wall, hoping that some of them will stick. None of them face up to the reality of this future. But mark my words – this changed Labour Party will.  

We have a plan in this manifesto. A total change of direction. Laser-focused on our cause: stability, growth, investment and reform. A government back in the service of your family, ready to change Britain.

We will restore the foundations of good government. National security, border security, economic security. We will make new choices to reform our economy and public services, hard choices, choices ducked for years.

These choices will be fully-funded and fully-costed. That is non-negotiable, you cannot play fast and loose with the public finances. We have lived through the damage that this does. The Government we have now played fast and loose with the finances, and working people paid the price.

Just after Liz Truss’ mini-budget, I went to Wolverhampton a week or so afterwards. And I met there a couple, they had a 3-year-old child, they had decided they want a second child. They had chosen a new home that was big enough to accommodate their new family. They got a mortgage offer that they could afford. Liz Truss crashed the economy, their mortgage offer went through the roof, they couldn’t afford it, they pulled out, they couldn’t move to their new home, they felt they were held back. But they also took the decision that they could no longer afford to have a second child. And they will live with that for the rest of their lives. That’s the price that they’re paying.

So I make no apologies for being careful with working peoples’ money, and no apologies for ruling out tax rises on working people. And this isn’t just the election, don’t think it’s just politics, this is an issue of conviction. I don’t believe it’s fair to raise taxes on working people when they’re already paying this much, particularly in a cost-of-living crisis.  

So let me spell it out. We will not raise income tax. We will not raise National Insurance. We will not raise VAT. That is a manifesto commitment.  

And another thing. Because there may be some people here today who say: where’s the surprise? Where’s the rabbit out of the hat? To which I say, if you want politics as pantomime, I hear Clacton is nice this time of year!

But seriously, we have to come to terms with this. Britain needs stability, not more chaos. I set out our long-term plan in this room 18 months ago, and that plan stands because it is the right plan.

We did the work properly. Our responsibility to give a clear direction to businesses, communities, everyone invested in Britain’s future. 

We took that seriously. 

So yes, those five national missions: higher growth, safer streets, cleaner energy, more opportunity, the NHS back on its feet – they remain at the core of this manifesto.  

But if they are to offer hope and clarity through these times. If they are to show, despite the hard road, the light of the certain destination, then we must keep to that road, no matter the short-term ebbs and flows of politics. Even in a campaign. 

That’s what mission-driven government means. A chance to stop us bobbing along until the next crisis blows us off course, and instead make sure we can keep going through the storm. Stability over chaos. Long-term over short-term. An end to the desperate era of gestures and gimmicks, and a return to the serious business of rebuilding our country.

And on that foundation of stability, we start to rebuild. A rebuilding that must begin, first and foremost, with new choices on economic growth. That is the mandate we seek from Britain at this election, a mandate for economic growth.

Because the way we create wealth in this country is broken. It leaves far too many people feeling insecure, people who are working hard and doing the right thing.

So we will reform it, and we will keep on reforming it, until it delivers for them. Wealth creation is our number one priority. Growth is our core business. The only route to improving the prosperity of our country and the living standards of working people. And that’s why we made it our first national mission in government.

But we must change our approach so that it comes from every community. Not just shared with every community, redistribution can’t be a one-word plan for our poorest towns and regions. 

No, we need to give them the tools they need, back their pride and potential. Growth for every community, growth from every community, that is the path to national renewal.   

And now, some people say that how you grow the economy is not a central question. That it’s not about how you create wealth, but how you tax it, how you spend it, how you slice the cake, that’s all that matters.

So let me be crystal clear, this manifesto is a total rejection of that argument. Because if you transform the nature of the jobs market, if you transform the infrastructure that supports investment in our economy, if you reform the planning regime – start to unlock the potential of billions upon billions of pounds worth of projects that are ready to go, held up by the blockers of aspiration – then clearly that does so much more for our long-term growth prospects.

And the same is true of public services. If we grew the economy at anything like the rate of the last Labour Government, we’d have tens of billions of pounds worth of investment for our public services every year.

So if you take nothing else away from today, let it be this. This changed Labour Party has a plan for growth: we are pro-business and pro-worker. The party of wealth creation. 

We will reform the planning rules – a choice ignored for 14 years – and build the homes and infrastructure you need. We will level up your rights at work – a choice ignored for 14 years – and raise your wages and your security. We will create a new industrial strategy – a choice ignored for 14 years. And we will back it with a national wealth fund – invest in clean steel, new ports, gigafactories. And we will create 650,000 new jobs for communities like yours, relight the fires of renewal across all four of our great nations.

You can choose a different path – you have the power. You can choose to take back control from Westminster. More democracy for your community. New powers over transport, skills, employment. Unlock the pride and potential in every community. That is a different choice you can make.

You can cut your bills for good with a new energy company – funded by a tax on the oil and gas giants: owned by the taxpayer, making money for the taxpayer, powering your home with clean British energy. That is a different choice you can make.

And you can choose to get our NHS back on its feet. End the 8am scramble. Back our NHS staff, get the best technology in their hands, slash waiting lists in your hospital, funded by taking on the non-doms and tax avoiders. That is a different choice you can make.

And I’ll tell you another choice you can make. You can choose to live in a country that believes in and backs its young people, the future of our country.

I am fed up of politicians lecturing young people about their responsibility to our nation, when those politicians fail in their responsibility to the future.

After what young people did during the pandemic, what they gave up for people – let’s be blunt – more at risk than them, that adds insult to injury. 

But more than that, it tears up the unwritten contract, the bonds of respect that hold these four great nations together, the values that make us who we are, the responsibilities we owe to each other. Past, present and future.

My dad was a tool-maker, he worked in a factory. My mum was a nurse. We didn’t have a lot when we were growing up, and, like millions of working-class children now, I grew up in a cost-of-living crisis.

I know what it feels like to be embarrassed to bring your mates home because the carpet is threadbare and the windows cracked. I was actually responsible for that because I didn’t put the football through it! But we didn’t have the money to fix it. Or to be honest – the time and energy. Economic insecurity drains you of that as well.

But look, what always comforted my parents was the idea that, in the end, Britain would give their children a fair chance.

The old saying, the story we still tell our children – “work hard and you can achieve anything” – that meant something.

My parents believed in that. But the question now, after 14 years, is – do we?

Do kids like those in Somers Town – a very poor part of my constituency, one of the poorest parts of Europe – do they look out of their window, to the glittering success of London 300 yards and another world away, and believe that success could belong to them?

Do parents here in Manchester – or in Glasgow, Cardiff, Plymouth, Sunderland, Sussex, Stoke-on-Trent – do they believe, with the certainty that they deserve, that the future will be better for their children?

Because in the Britain I want to leave to my children, they do.

And we can build it. We can restore the dream of home ownership to 1.5 million families. We can create 3,000 new nurseries to give them the best start in life. We can roll out a new generation of technical excellence colleges, a world-class vocational education respected by all, grounding young aspiration in the soil of their community.

We can guarantee, for every young person, a job placement or apprenticeship when they are out of work. We can invest in their mental health, their physical health, their dental health. We can reform the curriculum to prepare them for their world. 

We can create new youth hubs and give them something to do in their community. Raise their wages if they’re at work, give them the power of the vote, tackle injustice with a new Race Equality Act and with our mission on clean power we can lead the way on climate, finally show our responsibility to their future.

A fairer, healthier, a more secure Britain, at the service of working people, with growth from every community. A Britain ready to restore that promise. 

The bond that reaches through the generations and says – this country will be better for your children.

That is the change on offer on 4 July. 

That is our plan and I invite you all to join our mission to stop the chaos, turn the page and start to rebuild our country.

Thank you so much.

Keir Starmer – A stronger, safer, more secure Britain speech
Jun 3, 2024

Thank you, let me start by saying thank you Louise – for your service. What a fantastic contribution you will make to Parliament as the Labour MP for North East Derbyshire. And thank you John – for all your support and your leadership on this vital issue. 

Now, this week is the 80th anniversary of D-Day, so I want to start by remembering the bravery of those soldiers who sailed from the South of England to the beaches of France. The individual courage and the collective strength of our troops whose sacrifice that day turned the tide of the Second World War, brought liberation to Europe, and secured our freedom. 

This week and every week – we will remember them.

And we will honour them.

Some gave their lives so we could live freely. Others returned home to build a new Britain. We salute those who remain with us today and keep the memory of their fallen comrades alive. And we recognise with one voice, as a nation, that our debt can never be paid in full. 

But of course – we can honour their sacrifice with our decisions today. And we must. Because sadly, the world we live in today is perhaps more dangerous and volatile than at any time since then, and frankly, for my generation, that’s a shock. 

I mean, I remember vividly the day the Berlin Wall came down in 1989. I remember how I felt. A sense of freedom, of possibility, of peace. European countries once again free to choose their own futures, new allegiances being made, friendships forged out of the scars of war. 

And above all, a sense – as the wall came down – nothing like that could happen again. An end of an era. 

I didn’t think that in my lifetime I would see Russian tanks entering a European country again. The rumble of war rolling across our continent, soldiers kissing their children goodbye, desperate families fleeing across European borders in search of safety.

But in that moment, as we saw those pictures from Kyiv, I understood.

The post-war era is over and a new age of insecurity has begun. An era where the burden of history – for people and nations will once again, be heavier on our backs.

National security is the most important issue of our times. Something which, of course, is always true, and which for us, if we are privileged to serve our country, will become our solemn responsibility.

That’s not something I say lightly: the security and defence of our nation is personal to my family. Like so many families, I have relatives who served in the second world war. My mum’s brother, my uncle Roger, served in the Falklands on HMS Antelope. And I remember the terrible wait when his ship was bombed.

My mum’s fear as she sat by the radio every day, listening for news, and then the relief, a long week later, when we found out he had survived. So I know the courage, the service, and the sacrifice that allows us to sleep soundly at night from our forces and their families. 

I know it. I respect it. And I will serve it – with every decision. It is part of my story, and the reason why I said – from day one of my leadership – that the Labour Party had to change.

Change for a purpose. To respect your service, face the future in this dangerous world, and above all – to keep Britain safe. That is why, with my changed Labour Party, national security will always come first. 

That’s a message I took to Kyiv last year when I visited President Zelensky. A pledge of unwavering British support in the face of Russian tyranny. But we have to be resolute, not just in our support for Ukraine but also – in this era, at home. 

We must face down malign actors who try to attack and weaken our nation, and not just through traditional warfare over air, land and sea, but with hybrid threats – to our energy supply, cyber security, information warfare. 

Now – I would prefer if politics were kept out of this issue – even at this election. Throughout the whole of this Parliament. I have deliberately not been partisan over issues of national security. 

Yet just before this election, the Tories questioned this Labour Party’s commitment to national security. And I will not let that stand. The people of Britain need to know that their leaders will keep them safe – and we will. Furthermore, the truth is that after 14 years of the Tories, we are less safe and less secure.

You don’t have to take my word for it. The Tory’s own former defence secretary says the government has failed to take defence seriously. We have the smallest army since the time of Napoleon, at a time when other countries are firmly on a war footing.

So – even as we work tirelessly for peace, we have to be fit to fight. 

So let me be unequivocal. This Labour Party is totally committed to the security of our nation. To our armed forces. And, importantly, to our nuclear deterrent.

Just a few weeks ago I visited BAE Systems in Barrow-in-Furness. I was the first Labour leader to visit in 30 years.

I saw the nuclear submarines being made. I saw an industry that supports the local community and I met workers who are proud to be doing their bit for our national security. 

They deserve our full support, and they will get it. The nuclear deterrent is the foundation of any plan to keep Britain safe – it is essential. 

That’s why Labour has announced a new triple-lock commitment to our nuclear deterrent. We’ll maintain Britain’s Continuous at Sea deterrent 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.

Deliver all the needed future upgrades and we will build four new nuclear submarines like the ones I saw in Barrow. That won’t just keep us safe, it will also support good jobs and growth across the UK. 

One of my first visits after I became leader of the Labour Party was to Plymouth, the frontline of defence in this country. Devonport alone employs 2,500 service people and civilians, it supports 400 local businesses, and it generates around 10% of Plymouth’s income.

And when I was there, I met the shipbuilding apprentices – talented, ambitious young people. And I looked them in the eye and promised that I would fight for the future of Plymouth’s defence industry. And I will. 

Because it’s only by harnessing and supporting the strength of proud communities like Plymouth, Barrow, Aldershot, and so many more, that means we can safeguard our security and our growth for the decades to come. 

I mean look at Ukraine now. Industrial capacity is an absolutely critical part of security. So with Labour, Britain will be fit to fight. Within the first year of a Labour government, we will carry out a new strategic defence review. And we’re absolutely committed to spending 2.5% of GDP on defence as soon as possible, because we know our security isn’t just vital for our safety today, it’s absolutely central to our success for the future. 

National security and economic security must go hand in hand. 

And we also know that playing our part on the world stage makes us stronger and better off at home. So make no mistake: I am absolutely committed to rebuilding relationships with our allies. I went to the Munich Security Conference back in February, I met with world leaders from the US, Europe and the Middle East and I met the Secretary General of NATO. And I pledged to each of them that with a Labour government, the UK would be a point of stability in a chaotic world, that we would always meet our international obligations, take our responsibilities seriously and be a leader on the world stage once more. 

Because when I spoke about D-Day at the beginning I wasn’t just talking about respect for our past, I was thinking about our future as well. Because that is the best example of what cooperation can achieve in the face of fascism and aggression.

Our joint endeavour, our shared values, our common respect for freedom, democracy, liberty, that’s what we were fighting for and that fight never stops. 

There is a narrative you see sometimes that our values are a point of weakness. That’s what Putin thinks. 

But he’s wrong. Ukraine has shown that, and we must be prepared to stand up as well, because those values are our cause and our strength.  

Let me be clear. This is not a party-political issue, this is a national issue. It affects every single individual, every community, and Labour will always put our country first. We will serve working people across our nation, and respect our armed forces as they continue to protect our country. 

But on July 4th there is a choice. And you can choose to rebuild a country that is proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with European allies, that leads the way in standing up for our values and our freedom, all around the world, and that will never shy away from doing our duty at home and abroad.  

A stronger, safer, more secure Britain with Labour. 

That is the choice. It’s time to stop the chaos, time to turn the page and rebuild our country, together. 

Thank you very much.

Keir Starmer speaking at the launch of Labour’s six steps in Glasgow
May 31, 2024

Lorna, thank you, that was fantastic, what a story, what you’ve done, that’s a story that should be told right across Scotland, inspiring so many young people. 

And not only the story, but for you to walk from there up on to this stage, and deliver it in from of all these people, and the cameras. 

That is what inspiration is all about. And I can tell you with our plans for infrastructure we’ve got a lot of work coming your way. 

And thank you Anas and all the other speakers. Anas, thank you for your friendship and your leadership here in Glasgow, along with Jackie and with Ian. Because together we have transformed and changed the Labour Party and put it back in the service of working people, so thank you Anas. 

And it’s great to be back here in Scotland. 

It’s sunny. And I seem to be here every other week. And that’s not just because of the tandoori salmon in Mr Singhs, which is getting quite a reputation, but it is fantastic to be here.

And to be with all of you, to launch these first steps, because look, the wait is over. 

The Prime Minister has called a General Election. We have waited a long time for this. Scotland has waited a long time for this. A chance for an election. A chance to change. 

So if you’re a family that have been struggling with the cost of living day after day, week after week, month after month, if you’re a business that’s been struggling now for years against the odds. If you’re in service to your country or your community, then this election is for you. 

Because by the power of our democracy, the beautify, if you like, of our democracy, the power shifts to you. 

Your chance, your vote, your chance to vote for change. For your community and for Scotland. 

And I say to you this, make sure you use your vote, Your voice. Not to send a message. The SNP says they want you to vote to “Send a message”. Send a message? To go and sit on the opposition benches protesting? 

I don’t want you to vote to send a message. I want to you to vote to send a Government. 

A Labour government with Scotland at its heart. So this the chance for change. 

To end the chaos and division. To turn the page, and to rebuild Scotland and rebuild Britain. 

Because we have to stop the chaos. In Westminster, we have had fourteen years now of chaos and division.

IN Scotland, 17 years of spinning round in circles going round and round in circles getting nowhere. 

In Westminster, five prime minister in a row. 

Here in Scotland, three First Ministers in three years. 

That’s failure, that’s not delivering, that’s not good for Scotland. 

And there is a cost. 

There is a human a cost, there is always a human cost, of chaos and division and spinning round getting nowhere. 

And Anas and I went to a community centre not that far from here. We were at an event, and we finished the event, and then I was doing a short piece to camera using an autocue. 

So I went to the edge of the centre, set it up, and did my piece to camera. 

There was a 7 year old girl there. She had been with us during the event, she was very very sparkly, huge personality, quite incredible. 

And as I was doing my piece to camera, I saw her come over and watch what I was doing. She was really intrigued, 

What was I doing? This camera rolling? Some words? 

So when I finished, I said to her, do you want to have a go, do you want to see what it’s like? 

And the words she said to me will stick with me forever. She said, “I don’t read, me.”

“I don’t read, me.”

I carried those words all the way home with me. That went right through me. Because that is the cost that she is paying for the failure here in Scotland under the SNP. 

And they’re not gonna change the Tories won’t change in Westminster and the SNP won’t change here. 

It’ll be more chaos. More division. More chaos and more scandal. And they’ll feel more entitled if they got more at this election. 

So we have to stop the chaos, we have to draw a line.

But here is the good news, you don’t have to put it up with it anymore. 

You can choose change. 

But don’t take anything for granted. If you want change, you have to choose change. And vote for change. 

We can make sure that we boot the Tories out and end the chaos. 

Because change is on the ballot on the Fourth of July. 

Make no mistake there are two futures, two paths that we could take – down one path, the future is more chaos, more division, more of the same. 

Down the other path – hope and unity. A chance to take Scotland forward, to take Britain forward. Now Anas and I, Jackie, Ian, Angela, Ed, the whole party has change for everyone. To put it back int the service of working people. 

And what we ask now at this election, humbly, is the opportunity to change Scotland and change Britain and put them back in the service of working people. 

Now I know that in the past, some people here in Scotland, who wanted the Tories out, didn’t vote Labour, because they didn’t think that we could win. 

But we’ve changed Labour, we now have that opportunity, and you have to vote for it. Because there is no change without Scotland. 

There is no Labour without Scotland. 

And I believe that the solidarity of working people is not just our identity, it is our argument. 

The single greatest force, probably the only force, that can bring our four nations together. 

And that’s why Scotland is at the heart of our mission. 

And Anas and I have worked side by side to deliver across Scotland. We’ve got huge ambition to deliver for Scotland. 

Like all ambitions, it has to start with first steps. First Steps that we’ve set out this morning. As you’d expect, ruthlessly well prepared, fully costed, fully funded, and ready to go. 

Step 1 – Economic Stability 

The foundation of growth. The only way to keep taxes, inflation, and mortgages low. Because if we learnt one thing from recent years, it’s that if you lose control of the economy, it’s working people who pay the price. 

Liz Truss lost control of the economy, and in Scotland everybody with a mortgage is paying the price, month by month by month. 

The average increase: £120 in Scotland, per month. 

People desperately worried that they can afford it. Even thinking of having to sell their house and downsize. 

How do you think they feel when Rishi Sunak says: “We’ve turned a corner! Everything is fine!”

How do you think they feel when they see those that advised Liz Truss in the House of Lords swanning around because Rishi Sunak was too weak to block them? 

They are paying the price. 

We visited a food bank, Anas and I, not so long ago. 

And this was in Glasgow. A real shock. People going to pick up their food, because they couldn’t afford to put food on their own table. Shocking in its own right. Shocking particularly when we saw people coming from work, having finished work, to come and pick up a food parcel. 

That is the price that they are paying/. There simply always a cost to chaos and division. And that’s why stability is our first step. 

Step 2 – We will work with you to help cut NHS waiting times in Scotland 

It is impossible to overstate how many people are on waiting lists, and the impact it has on them. It is now one in six in Scotland. I was here last year saying it was one in seven. It’s now one in six. 

That means almost everyone watching or listening to this, is probably on a waiting list themselves, or knows someone who is. That’s shocking. It’s absolutely shocking. 

What we can achieve together is 160,000 extra appointments every year here in Scotland. What a difference that would make. And we would pay for it by cracking down on tax avoidance, and getting rid of the non Dom tax status. 

Step 3 – Make work pay with the New Deal for Working People 

As Angela says, the greatest levelling up for workers rights in a generation.

And what does that mean?

Zero hours contracts banned. Fire and rehire ended. A genuine living wage. Because I believe that everybody is entitled to dignity, and respect at work. 

That is a bare minimum.

But I also know that dignity and respect at work are essential for economic growth. 

Step 4 – Great British Energy 

That publicly owned company, owned by the tax payer, making money for the tax payer, harnessing clean power. 

Do you remember what the Tories said ten years ago?

“Cut the green crap.” 

Made us more exposed to what was going on in the world. 

And as a result, your bills higher. 

I want to be clear – we are not turning of the taps for oil and gas, they’ll be part of the mix of decades to come. 

But the transition is coming. 

We can’t stick our head in the sand. 

And as Ed said, renewables are cheaper. There is a massive prize here: lower bills, security, the next generation of jobs. So clean power is the best opportunity we’ve had in a generation for the next generation of jobs. 

Now other countries are in the race. 

Look across Europe. Look to America and Rishi Sunak is in the changing room. 

I want to be in the race, and I want to win the race. Why not Scotland? 

I went to Aberdeen and there is a glimpse of the future there. Because what I saw and talked through with the energy sector and the workers there was the pipelines and skills they would use for the next generation of jobs. 


And I asked them: how long would these jobs last for? And they said decades, upon decades, upon decades. Jobs for the next generation here in Scotland. 

And Scotland can, and Scotland will, lead the clean energy revolution. 

And that’s why Great British Energy, which will cut those bills, which will give us that security and those jobs, will be headquartered right here in Scotland. 

Step 5 – Maximising Scotland’s influence on the world stage 

I’ll give you an example of that. Scotland has the second largest off shore wind capacity in the world. Yes three times as many jobs, are in Denmark.

That’s shocking. 

I went to Whitely’s wind farm. 

Some people have heard this story but it sticks with me. 

There’s 200 – 300 wind turbines there. Really huge bits of engineering and skill and design. 

And I went up and they were turning around and generating energy. I had two problems: one, we didn’t have a battery big enough to store the energy – they were turning them off because of a lack of planning. 

Second, I asked a question, how many of these incredible pieces of kit were built in Scotland? 

None. 

Not one. 

They were towed in from other countries. 

Not a single one was built here.

We have to end that. We can change that. 

Floating offshore wind is the next generation. We can get ahead. Not only have floating off shore wind, but build it her win Scotland, with manufacturing jobs, engineering, building on the skills that we have here. Promoting Scotland abroad. Scottish business abroad, and attract investment needed for jobs here – good jobs – in Scotland. 

Step 6 – Jobs and opportunities for young people 

Training people for the future. For the jobs, and the work and lives they’re actually going to live. Making sure that young people are actually going to get the apprenticeships they need. Support first time buyers. Work with Anas to create 50,000 Scottish jobs in clean energy. 

So this election is the chance for change, the chance for renewal, the chance for Scotland and Britain to go forward. 

A new generation of Scots on Labour government benches. Working with me, for Scotland, and delivering for Scotland. I believe Scotland can lead the way and lead the change. 

Stop the chaos, turn the page, rebuild.

Make sure you take that chance, make sure you vote Labour. Thank you.

Keir Starmer speech at Labour’s six steps for change in Wales
May 30, 2024
Thank you, Michael. That was a really powerful address from you, and it’s a big thing, to come up here and say what you just said, and it’s means a huge amount, to make the big decision to change the party you vote for, as a life long Tory voter, is a really big thing. 

For me, it vindicates all the hard work of the last four and a half years. I was determined to change this Labour Party and put it back in the service of working people, and your words are so important to me, to all of our candidates, to all of our staff, to all of the Labour movement, when you say: life long Tory voter, I’ve had enough, I’m voting Labour. Thank you, Michael. 

Vaughan, thank you for your words. Thank you for your leadership here in Wales, it’s been really good to work with you so far in my position as Leader of the Opposition. I’m really looking forward to a new partnership, where we can both deliver together for Wales. Thank you Vaughan. 

And thank you all for that incredibly warm reception when we walked in. It was fantastic to see everybody in the room, such a great feeling, and Abergavenny, what am amazingly beautiful place. We arrived last night and the sun was shining, absolutely stunning. 

Not that long ago, Vic and I and the kids were at Crickhowell, we holiday up there. It is a really beautiful part of Wales, and many people in this room will have been to the Bear Pub, I’m sure in Crickhowell. If you haven’t been, make sure you go before you leave this part of the world.  As Caroline Harris will attest, Vic and I holiday in Wales every year. We go down to Swansea, she looks after and last year we were in The Gower near Oxwich and it’s really really beautiful. 

So I love being here, and it’s fantastic to be back here today in Wales. And what an opportunity, what a chance to launch our campaign. Because Rishi Sunak has finally called the General Election. He has given us our chance to take our case to the country, and I don’t know about you, but I think Wales has been waiting for this General Election for a very very long time. 

And we in the Labour Party have been working for, and waiting of this general election for a very very long time. And if just over a week ago, Rishi Sunak thought he was laying a careful trap of an ambush, he didn’t get catch us. He caught himself in his own ambush, so now we get the chance. What went through all of those speeches this morning, is this strong sense that now is the time for change. 

Change and hope for a better future. With that sense of national renewal, taking our communities, our countries forward for the future. So I say to you, if you were a family, that’s been struggling with the cost of living for a long time now. And I mean struggling. Struggling across Wales, struggling elsewhere, if you are a business that has been absolutely up against it these past few years, and if you have been serving your country, or serving your community, then this election, this election is for you. 

Because this is the chance to end the chaos and the division, to turn the page, to rebuild Wales and rebuild our entire country together to elect a government that as Vaughan said, would serve working people here in Wales and make that connection – a government in Westminster, and government in Wales, working together and delivering for Wales. 

I don’t know about, but I think we have all had enough of fourteen years of chaos and division. Chaos and division, feeding chaos and division. And it feels like we’re spinning round and round in circles and getting absolutely nowhere. 

And there’s a cost to that. There’s a human cost to that. Go to Port Talbot, talk as I did who are facing the prospect of losing their job in the steel industry. And I say to Rishi Sunak, go and look those people in the eye as I’ve done, and you’ll see their anxiety about the damage that is being done by a government that doesn’t have a plan. A government that is too divide to take our county and our industries forward. Go and talk to those workers, those families, years and years of investment, skills that they have put in, facing now an uncertain future. That is the human cost, that they are paying, for a Government that is divided, chaotic and for a Prime Minister who won’t pick up the phone to the former First Minister in Wales to do a blind thing about those jobs. 

I’ve been there, I’ve looked them in the hours, and I’ve told those workers: I will fight for every single job that they have there and for the future of steel here in Wales. We must fight. 

Because this is a change election. There are two futures, two futures out there on the 4th of July. Two paths that we can take. It is a very very clear choice. And we need to spell it out. More chaos and division, cos they’re not going to change. It would be more – fourteen years already – another five years of chaos and division, non-delivery and failure. 

Or, turn the page, hope and unity, and rebuild our communities and our countries with Labour. A Government that works for you. That tires cup no more conflict, between the first minister here and the prime minister in London, but both working together for Wales Imagine what could be delivered for Wales, with that combination of two government. This is a huge prize. To elect a Government that wants devolution to work. That doesn’t want the conflict, will get around the table, will work together, and every day deliver for the working people of Wales. 

So the first thing we have to do is end that chaos and division. The good news is, the good news is, you don’t have to put up with it anymore. 

A vote for Labour is a vote to turn the page to change our country. We’ve changed the Labour Party. Put it back in the service of working people. We are humbly asking permission from people for the opportunity to change our country and put it back in the service of working people. 

Now I know that will be difficult. I’m not going to stand here and say it will be easy. It will be difficult. Tireless work. But I’ve never shied away from the difficult. When I was heading up the CPS, we had to change it, it was difficult. Many people said don’t do It, slow down. But we changed it. 

When I worked in Northern Ireland, it was difficult work. We were trying to change the police service, so it served all communities. It was difficult, painstaking work, but we did it. 

And here in the Labour Party, we had to change our party, and put it back in the service of working people. That wasn’t easy. Lots of people said don’t do it that way. Don’t go so fast. But we did it. We will never shy away from that. 

Because driving through this for me has always been country first, party second. 

And the opportunity is now there to work together to deliver for Wales. And there is no brighter future without Wales. Because I believe that the solidarity of working people is not just our identity, it is our argument. It’s the most powerful force for uniting all four nations across the United Kingdom. So this is the change that we must bring about. 

It is difficult. It is ambitious. And like any ambition, you need first steps. You need to set out what the big thing is that you want to change, and what the first steps are going to be realise that change. 

And that’s why I’m proud to set out our first steps here today. As you would expect, ruthlessly well-prepared. Thought through. Ready to deliver. Fully costs and fully funded. Which is more that can be said of the ideas the Tories are flinging on the table on the daily basis, rummaging around in the toy box of bad ideas and putting one on the table very day. Unfunded and uncosted. 

Step 1: Economic stability. 

In 2024, it feels odd to have to say to you that stability is change. But it is. That’s what we haven’t had. Stability. Because stability is the foundation of growth. We won’t get economic growth without stability. And we all know that if you lose control of the economy, it’s working people who pay the price. 

Liz Truss lost control of the economy. And in Wales, working people on a mortgage, are now paying an average £240 more each and every month. 

Rishi Sunak says we’ve turned a page. 

Liz Truss says – put the people who helped me in the House of Lords. 

Rishi Sunak says “OK”. 

And in Wales, each and every day, families are paying hundreds of pounds more, a reminder of the cost, they are paying of the damage the Tories did. TATA Steel are paying the price. We have to invest if we want the future of steel in this country. We have to invest in all of the sectors that need it. That’s why we want to set up a National Wealth Fund. Other countries have it. We can drive our industries forward, with the growth that we need, the businesses, the partnership that will help us deliver. And that’s why economic stability is step one. 

Step 2: Working with Vaughan, bringing down those waiting list. 

There’s too many people on waiting lists. And we’ll do that – fully funded and fully costed. We’re going to get rid of the non-dom tax status. Properly. That’s the tax that allows the super rich to be here in this country, making their money, but not pay their tax here. I don’t agree with that. I think you should be paying your tax here, and we’ll make sure that people do.

And we’ll also crack down on those who are avoiding their tax. And with that money, we’ll bring down the waiting list. And that means we can invest in England in the NHS, 40,000 appointments each and every week. What a difference that will make. And that of course, as you all know, also means more money for the NHS in Wales. SO that in Wales are can build on the work that is being done. 

Now this matters to me. My mum was a nurse. She was a really proud nurse. There are some fantastic pictures of her in her nursing uniform. Such pride. We say this yesterday buy the way as well, we were in Worcester at the college there where they ar training up the next generation of nurses. I saw the same pride there that  I saw on the pictures of my mum. It was her livelihood. But of course, it became her lifeline. Because she was extremely ill for most of her life, and literally her life depended on the care that the NHS gave her time and time and time again, in her particular case. 

There other cases in this room as I look around. SO it matters to me, and it matters to Vaughan, because of cause the NHS saved his life earlier in his life. So it matters to me. And the idea of us being able to work together, to make sure the NHS is at its very best, capable of delivering. Not just back on it’s fit, but fit for the future.

Of course we are proud of the NHS. Roots right here. We look back great pride every year. Every year in the Labour movement we celebrate the NHS. It is one of the greatest achievements of any government ever, that Labour achievement. I want not just to look back, proudly, I want to look forward and be able to say that the NHS that we will build will be there for the next seventy years to be able toy rely on it in the way that Vaughan and I and my mum relied on it. 

Step 3: Boarder Security Command.

Now the government has lost control of our borders. Lost control of our borders. 10,000 people this year alone have crossed the channel in small boats. Ten thousand. That is a record. So for all of the rhetoric, that is a record number coming across. 

Nobody but nobody should be making that dangerous journey across the channel, and it’s a test for all governments as to how they respond to it – and would be governments – it’s a test for the current government, and for us: what is your response to this serious problem? Exploited vulnerable people being put in boats to go across the channel by gangs that are making huge amounts of money from them. And there is a choice, as there is a choice in pretty well everything political, what is your response: 

You can either have a gimmick, or a serious response. 

What has the government gone for? A gimmick. The Rwanda Scheme. Now Rishi Sunak never believed in it. When he first saw it, as Chancellor, he didn’t back it. He tried to block it. He didn’t think it would work. I’m not surprised. Because if the numbers going to Rwanda are less than one percent of those that arrive by small boat, the ninety nine per cent of them are not going.

And if you don’t think that the criminal gangs running this trade are telling that tot the people that they’re exploiting, then you don’t know criminal gangs. IT was never going to work. He knew it wouldn’t work,. But what did he do. He caved in to his party. He didn’t stick to his guns. He caved in. £600 million later, of taxpayer money – it’s not working, and what has he done, he has called an election before it can be tested. 

Weakness upon weakness. In the Labour Party this changed Labour Party, we go for serious solutions. This is a serious problem. So, Border Security Command: A new elite force, with a new commander, bringing together MI5, the police, national security agencies, the crown prosecution services: an elite force, a new command with new resources and new powers drawing on counter terrorism powers. Because when I was Chief Prosecutors had to work with police and law enforcement across Europe to bring down terrorist gangs. These were sophisticated terrorist gangs, and we did it, and we bought them down, and they’re now serving time.

I will never accept that somehow the only gangs that apparently we can’t take down by the same means are the vile gangs running this smuggling trades. I’ll never accept that. We will break it. 

Step 4: Great British Energy.

A publicly owned company. This is a company owned by the taxpayer, making money for the taxpayer, and investing in green British power. And I’ll tell you why we need it, Because we have been overly exposed by the terrible decisions of this government. Ten years or so ago, they said “cut the green crap”.

Remember that? Cut the green crap. And they stopped investing in renewables. They stopped the insulation that we need on our homes, and they left us exposed to the sort of challenges that we have internationally. Exposed. 

And so when Ukraine was invaded, and Putin invaded. We were more exposed than other countries, and you’re paying more on your bill because of the approach that they took. Bills are up. We have got to turn that around. 

It is a challenge, we’ll rise to that challenge. We’ve lost ten years because of the approach of the Tories. But it is also probably the single biggest opportunity that we have – not just for lower bills – but for the next generation of jobs. And Vaughan and I went to Holyhead Port just a few weeks ago, to look at the potential of that port, for floating offshore wind. 

And we have a plan to transform that port to make sure it can handle floating off shore wind. Floating offshore wind is the next generation. It is going to be the gamechanger. And some country is going to get ahead and be the leader in the world. We’ve got the skills, we’ve the potential, we’ve got the ports, we need to take advantage of that, and what we’ve got from this government, is such a lack of direction that just as all the other countries are getting in to the race, they’re in the changing room. 

Not prepared to let that happen. The race is on. I want to be not just in that race, but as you’d expect with me, I want to win that race. And I think we can win that race. 

Step 5 – Tackling anti social behaviour.

Now I don’t know how many times people have said to me, when I was prosecutor, since I’ve been in politics: Keir, anti social behaviour, it’s low level, it’s low level crime. Shouldn’t really concentrate on it. 

I don’t want to hear that ever again. It blights the lives of so many people. 

Whether they are living in a huge community, a small community, a middle sized community. If you feel that you can’t open your front door after dark, if you feel can’t walk down your own street, or walk around your own community, if you feel as some of our young people do, that they can’t even walk down their high streets without antisocial behaviour, that has a huge impact on people’s lives and how they feel about taking themselves forward. 

And, of course, on our business. It is not low level. And that’s why we’ll have 13,000 new neighbourhood police, working in their communities and dealing with antisocial behaviour, because I am determined that we will have a safe and secure environment for every single person in Wales and across the United Kingdom to live in, so that they can take themselves forward, and build the lives that they deserve.

Step 6 – Working with the Welsh Government, to ensure that we have, and are able through our education, to prepare our young children, your young people, for the lives that they are actually going to live and the work they’re actually going to do. 

Now I was the first in my family to go to university. I know the power that education can have on a young person’s life. And I want every single young person, wherever they come from, whatever their background, to feel that success belongs to them. 

Vaughan shares this approach. And Welsh Labour is already doing so much. The biggest I think school and college building programme since the 1960s. That’s the investment already happening here in Wales. Imagine how much more we could with the Government in Westminster working with the Government in Wales and delivering for our children, the future that they deserve. 

So six steps, one card, make sure you’ve got yours. We’re going to take this to every single doorstep across Wales to make our case for a changed future. One card, six steps. Wales and Westminster working together. Turning the page. A change election. Where we can stop the chaos and division. Put an end to it. We can turn the page and rebuild Wales and the United Kingdom together, working together for the future. That is the way forward, that is the choice, Vote Labour.

Revealed: The Conservatives’ £71 billion worth of reckless spending will lead to interest rate rises
May 29, 2024

The Labour Party has today held an emergency press conference to expose the threat to economic stability posed by Rishi Sunak’s reckless and unfunded general election promises.

Darren Jones, Labour’s Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury, released new analysis of the £71 billion worth of pledges Rishi Sunak has already promised just seven days into the general election. It warns that the Conservatives’ unfunded policy pledges risk an interest rate hike that would increase monthly mortgage repayments on a typical home by £350. All indications suggest there will be more unfunded pledges to come as the campaign progresses.

Labour’s analysis includes a new scorecard which details how the combined pledges so far would equate to a £71 billion rise in borrowing, equivalent to around 2 per cent of GDP, meaning interest rates could rise by around 250 basis points. 

The analysis is based on Treasury documents that have been heavily pushed by Conservative ministers. Using this same analysis, a 2 per cent GDP spike in borrowing could increase interest rates by around 250 basis points, or 2.5 per cent. That means that the consequences of their spending – by their own analysis – would be an interest rate rise of 2.5 per cent.

Labour is promising to change the country by delivering economic stability with tough spending rules, to grow our economy and keep taxes, inflation and mortgages as low as possible. On this foundation of economic stability, Labour’s plans for growth include building 1.5 million homes with the biggest boost to affordable, social and council housing for a generation, making work pay with a new deal for working people and creating 650,000 good jobs across the country through the National Wealth Fund.
Darren Jones, Labour’s Shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury, commenting on the Conservatives’ reckless general election pledges, said:

“In just the first week of this campaign, Rishi Sunak and the Conservatives have promised £71 billion of unfunded spending. Some of the Tories’ costings are nonsense. Some of them they are spending the same pot of money twice. Some of them they are simply refusing to say how they would pay for it.

“We know where this sort of kamikaze approach to the public finances leads: we’ve seen it before with Liz Truss. The Tories haven’t learned the lesson, and now they’re doing it again. It is economy-crashing, family finance-destroying madness. It cannot continue. They have been told this over and over again. Not just by Labour, but by independent experts.

“Using this Treasury document, we can estimate that a 2% of GDP spike in borrowing could increase interest rates by around 250 basis points, or 2.5%. That means that the consequences of their spending – by their own analysis – would be an interest rate rise of 2.5%.

“When that exit poll lands at 10pm on Thursday 4th July, the first thing people will look at is the number of seats each party is predicted to get. The next thing will be the financial markets. Because if the Tories carry on down this path, with unsustainable, unfunded promises it could cause a loss of market confidence. 

“This could not be more serious. It will mean our economy sliding back into recession, ordinary people around the country paying the price with their jobs and their mortgage bills. The truth is simple: Britain cannot afford five more years of the Tories. My message is simple: reckless Tory spending must stop.”

Comments from experts and business leaders on the Conservatives’ economic plans:

Jonathan Portes, Professor of Economics and Public Policy, King’s College London, said:

“Since the pandemic, we have had three years of incoherent, irresponsible and damaging economic and tax policies.  The Conservative plan appears to be for more of the same. The UK badly needs stable and predictable policies aimed at boosting growth and productivity over the long term, including tax policies that will allow us to find public services properly.”

Iain Anderson, business leader and ex-Conservative advisor, said:

“We need the next Government to have fiscal credibility above all else. Look what happened in the mini budget when the Conservatives pushed every button on the computer at the same time and hoped for the best. The next chancellor must not play fast and loose with our economy again.” 

Tommy Stadlen, Tech Entrepreneur, said:

“Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves have won the trust of business with carefully costed, smart policies – in stark contrast with the other side.”

Alex Depledge, Technology entrepreneur, Founder and CEO, Resi, said:

“There is a sense that both change and stability are round the corner and I think the markets are holding up well because of it.”

Tom Adeyoola, Co-Founder, Extend Ventures, said:

“This government feels wired, tired and expired. Business needs considered change to get us going again.”  

“It’s time for considered long term thinking and not the kitchen sink politics of a government long past its sell by date.” 

Paul Corcoran, CEO, Agent, said:

“Long-term fiscal reassurance is certainly welcomed by our investment community and this sits at the very heart of Reeves’ business growth strategy.” 

“We desperately need an ambitious, joined-up, long-term strategy for doing good business here in the UK. A dynamic plan co-created with business leaders to drive the policies, investment, and sustained growth the UK needs to thrive once more. Businesses, and indeed the people they employ, are ready for this change.”

